FILED SUPREME COURT STATE OF WASHINGTON 2/22/2022 8:00 AM BY ERIN L.LENNON CLERK NO. 99948-1IN THE SUPREME COURTOF THE STATE OF WASHINGTONIN RE THE MATTER OF RECALL CHARGES AGAINSTWASHINGTON STATE GOVERNOR JAY R.INSLEEAPPELANT’S REPLY BRIEF TO GOVERNOR INSLEE’SRESPONSE BRIEFAPPELANT PROPONENT C DAVIS ET ALC Davis Pro Se2103 Harrison Ave NWPMB 2164Olympia WA 98502recallinslee@gmail.com1I.INTRODUCTIONRecalling a lawless elected official is a serious undertaking. In order to do so we needed to craft charges that show prima fascia malfeasance, misfeasance or violation of oath of office. We have developed 5 charges that meet these criteria.The court's role is only to determine sufficiency, not to try the case. The evidence is to be taken as true. In our opening brief we have detailed a considerable amount of sufficient evidence, but in reply we will address any questions raised, thatare relevant, and point out where the Attorney General representing Governor Jay Inslee has missed the point. Combined with our opening brief we will show that our chargesare compelling and deserve to be put before the people to decide.The attorneys for the Governor are employing several tacticsto misdirect the attention of the court. Our charges are 2violations of the law and are NOT directly related to Covid-19. We do not comment on whether Covid-19 is real, whether it is apandemic or how many people may have suffered from it. Covid-19 is NOT on trial here. The court must consider the charges and their sufficiency independently of Covid-19 or any other socioeconomic or policy issues [policy issues are not subjects for recall].The attorneys for the Governor, in their response play a game of straw-man arguments. It is vital to consider that a violation of state statutes is likely not a constitutional challenge and that a violation of case law is likely also not a constitutionalchallenge. Intent is, “a mental plan to do that which is forbidden by the law. Unlike offenses that require a Specific Intent, it is not necessary that the accused intend the precise harm or result. It is sufficient if the person meant to do the act that caused the harm or result.”1 As the Governor knew or 1 https://legal-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/General+Intent3should have known, his actions, as presented in these charges were forbidden by law or fundamentally wrong, must be taken as his intent to commit those actions. A crime KNOWINGLY committed, even if well intentioned, is still a crime. A governors emergency powers are limited by statute RCW 43.06.220. The Recall was established by voter initiative in 1913. Wash. Const. Article I §§ 33 and 34. The Constitution establishes a very broad right of the electorate to recall elected public officials [except judges]. (State ex rel Citizens Against Mandatory Bussing v. Brooks, 80 Wn.2D 121, 492 P.2d 536 (1972)).II.ANALYSIS AND ARGUMENTThe Attorney General has renumbered the charges in order to create confusion, but we will retain the original numbers for clarity.Charge 1. We elected not to appeal charge #1. We retain 4the original charge numbering for clarity.Charge 2. Separation of powers.On or about March 18, 2020, Governor Inslee issued Proclamation 20-19, “Evictions.” The Evictions order prohibited residential landlords from initiating judicial action seeking a writ of restitution involving a dwelling unit if the alleged basis for the writ is the failure of the tenant or tenants totimely pay rent. Violations of Proclamation 20-19 were punishable as crimes pursuant to RCW 43.06.220(5). Proclamation 20-19 violated Article IV, Section 1 of the Washington State Constitution, Judicial Power, Where Vested.” The very essence of civil liberty consists in the right of every individual to claim the protection of the laws through the courts, whenever he/she receives an injury. Marbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137, 163, 2 L.Ed. 60 (1803); Putman v. Wenatchee Valley Med. Cent., P.S. 166 Wn.2d 974, 979 (2009). The Governor, through Proclamation 20-05 and 20-519, stripped a class of Washington residents of the fundamental,constitutionally protected right to access courts. The Governor seemingly argues that he suspended a “substantive right,” not a “procedural” one. This misinterpretation of the law is flat out wrong on an issue that has been clear since Waples v. Yi, 169 Wn.2d 152 (2013) (Striking down a pre-suit notice imposed by the legislature on pre-suit notice for medical malpractice claims).The judicial power of the state is vested in the supreme court and superior courts both with an independent constitutional authority. See WA Const. Article IV, §§ 1, 2, and 6. The supreme court has the inherent right to determine its court rules, including how Washington courts are accessed. Waples, 169 Wn.2d at 159-160. The Attorney General makes erroneous claims by citing Doe v. Puget Sound Blood Ctr., 117 Wn.2d 772,781,819 P.2d 370 (1991), which focused on liabilityand the outcome of litigation but has no bearing on the access 6to file a writ for redress of wrongs done to an individual. This citation is merely a distraction from the separation of powers issue that we challenge. The Attorney General also makes claim that an injured party [in this case a landlord], might cleverly get around the Governor's proclamation by filing a cause of action for breach of contract. The possibility that a party might “get around” an illegal action is in no way a justification for that illegal action. Even if a party could find a mitigation for a lawless act, it doesn't absolve the lawless actor from their action.The Attorney General also offers up comic relief with thenotion that Proclamation 20-19 did not deprive landlords of ALL remedies to a nonpaying tenant, with this amusing and illogical example: “it allowed a landlord to bring a breach of contract claim to obtain a money judgment where a tenant was not paying rent after the tenant refused or failed to comply with 7a repayment plan...”, See Inslee Response Brief. So, if a tenant couldn't or elected NOT to play rent money you could hypothetically get a judgment that they couldn't or wouldn't payeither. The Attorney General speculates the number of renters that MAY have been affected. But, the numbers of landlords who HAVE lost their property [*]2, investment and savings are known and horrifically large.“Roughly 23 percent of small landlords leasing single-family rentals had sold at least one property as of February, according to a survey by the National Rental Home Council.” This is due to Inslee preventing landlords from accessing to the courts as a means of removing non paying tenants. “The National Apartment Association, a landlord group, filed a lawsuit against the government in federal claims court late last month, seeking $26.6 billion to pay debts it said weren't2https://www.msn.com/en-us/money/realestate/we-re-drowning-small-landlords-squeezed-by-eviction-ban-slow-aid/ar-AANjGDK 8covered by rental assistance.” This figure represents a small portion of the income lost to landlords from non paying tenants.“The Horwaths said that they have one tenant that has notpaid rent or utilities since March and now owes $14,000. Unpaid utility bills with the city could mean a lien is put on the Horwath’s property.” “We think she stopped paying out of choice… she bought a new car — that’s one reason why we think she must have the money. When we drive by the place, there’s a new Dodge Challenger in the driveway,” Dan Horwathsaid. [**]3As bad as this is, and this is just the tip of the iceberg, it is it is another example of the Attorney General trying to shift the focus away from separation of powers, it is a takings argument, which is a distraction from our charge. We make a separation of powers argument. 3 https://www.thedailyworld.com/northwest/as-landlords-sue-state-for-loss-of-income-lewis-co-officials-anticipate-end-of-eviction-moratorium/9The Attorney General further makes the erroneous argument, that, “Proclamation 20-19 was developed in a consultative process with a variety of stakeholder groups.” CP198-199. This is as meaningful as saying that a group of bank robbers consulted on the best was to rob a bank. Though this may be true, robbing a bank is still illegal regardless of howconsultative or how many stakeholders were involved. Violating the independence of the court cannot be excused just because the Governor had so much intent as to organize stakeholders to plan it. As a further note, residential rentals are governed by the Landlord Tenant Act, RCW Title 59, which by RCW 59.12.030 would like make a breach of contract pointless. But this is neither here nor there as the issue at hand is the separation of powers, to which, emergency or not, the Governor lacks the authority to restrict the court's independence.10From RCW 59, the landlord tenant act:“WHEREAS, under RCW 59.12 (Unlawful Detainer), RCW 59.18 (Residential Landlord-Tenant Act), and RCW 59.20(Manufactured/Mobile Home Landlord-Tenant Act) residents seeking to avoid default judgment in eviction hearings need to appear in court in order to avoid losing substantial rights to assert defenses or access legal and economic assistance.”The Attorney General cites RCW 43.06.220 (1) as authority for place an eviction moratorium, but this is another distraction. The charge is specifically aimed at separation of powers and the independence of the judiciary. Whether or not there is a mechanism for an eviction moratorium is not a subjectof this charge and RCW 43.06.220(1). The charge is violation of separation of powers.The Attorney General also makes a frivolous argument about economic hardship and homelessness. Again, our charge is strictly about separation of powers and the independence of the judiciary. Economics and homelessness are policy issues, 11which are the sole responsibility of the Governor. The Attorney General recognizes that homelessness was a significant problembefore the moratorium and therefor totally unrelated to either the pandemic or the Governor's created economic collapse. Thisis not justification for violation separation of powers. Having unsuccessful executive policies have no bearing on our charge, as they do NOT give the Governor special powers that are NOTin statute or the constitution.The Attorney General argues about economic hardship oftenants, with no mention of economic hardship to landlords. But since this too is a red herring and frivolous argument it doesn't matter. The charge is violation of separation of powers. There have been thousands of landlords who have been denied their day in court as a result of Governor Inslee's violation of separation of powers and the independence of the judiciary. As an attorney, and governor he KNEW or should have KNEW 12that he didn't not have legal authority to violate the independence of the judiciary.The court must not be distracted, the issue at hand is separation of powers and the independence of the judiciary. Nothing in the emergency statute, the constitution or case law gives the Governor authority to violate the independence of thisbranch of government. The Attorney General presented no relevant argument that supports the legality of interfering with the independence of the judiciary.In the Attorney General's Response Brief it is claimed that RCW 43.06.220(1)(h) gives the Governor unrestricted powers without limitation.“(h) Such other activities as he or she reasonablybelieves should be prohibited to help preserve and maintain life, health, property or the public peace.”But the flaw in the Attorney General's argument is reasonable. No reasonable person could defend that acting against the most 13fundamental principles of a free society has any shred of reasonableness.The Attorney General cites, Cougar Bus. Owners Ass'n., 97 Wn.2d at 476, but in that case the court determined that the governor has broad discretion as to the timing of when to declare an emergency [That case was a natural DISASTER, a volcano]. But Cougar does NOT give the Governor unrestrictedpower, and nothing in RCW 43.06.220(1)(h) gives the Governor the power to completely overturn the structure of our democracy.At Response Brief pg. 23, the Attorney General makes a patently false assumption, claiming that I “acknowledge … thatthe Governor acted pursuant to explicit statuary authority”. In fact, due to the nature of the pretext of the Governor's declaration of emergency, the Governor had NO authority to declare a state of emergency, See CHARGE #5. However, 14CHARGE #2 only address the separation of powers, which the Governor had no authority to suspend. When Inslee proclaimed [20-19]:“ACCORDINGLY, based on the above noted situation and under the provisions of RCW 43.06.220(1)(h), and to help preserve and maintain life, health, property or the public peace, effective immediately and until April 17, 2020, I hereby prohibit the following activities related to residential evictions by all residential landlords operating residential rental property in Washington State: 1. Residential landlords are prohibited from serving a noticeof unlawful detainer for default payment of rent related tosuch property under RCW 59.12.030(3).2. Residential landlords are prohibited from issuing a 20-day notice for unlawful detainer related to such property under RCW 59.12.030(2), unless the landlord attaches anaffidavit attesting that the action is believed necessary to ensure the health and safety of the tenant or other individuals. 3. Residential landlords are prohibited from initiating judicial action seeking a writ of restitution involving a dwelling unit if the alleged basis for the writ is the failureof the tenant or tenants to timely pay rent. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to, an action underChapters 59.12 or RCW 59.18 RCW. 4. Local law enforcement is prohibited from serving or otherwise acting on eviction orders that are issued solely for default payment of rent related to such property. 15Nothing in this Proclamation is intended to prohibit local law enforcement from acting on orders of eviction issued for other reasons, including but not limited to waste, nuisance or commission of a crime on the premises.”Governor Inslee flagrantly, blatantly, intentionally and with abundant factually and legal sufficiency ROBBED the separation of powers BANK.This charge demonstrates a serious threat to our democracy and the fundamental principles on which it was founded, and is legally and factually sufficient and constitutes malfeasance, misfeasance AND violation of oath of office.Charge 3. Open Public Meetings Act (RCW 42.30)Governor Inslee exceeded statutory authority granted in RCW 43.06.220(2)(g) by suspending the Open Public Meetings Act, infringing on the People of Washington’s right to petition the government for redress and infringing on the People’s rightsto peaceably assemble under the First Amendment of the UnitedStates Constitution, thereby violating RCW 43.06.220(2)(g). 16Such a violation of RCW 43.06.220(2)(g) constitutes misfeasance, a violation of the Governor’s oath of office, or both; either result subjects the Governor to recall. RCW 43.06.220 creates a list of places that the governor may prohibiting people from being, and allows the setting of curfews and numbers of people who may gather:(a) Any person being on the public streets, or in the public parks, or at any other public place during the hours declared by the governor to be a period of curfew;(b) Any number of persons, as designated by the governor, from assembling or gathering on the public streets, parks, or other open areas of this state, either public or private;By applying the ordinary-meaning canon we can better understand the meaning of "OPEN". public street, public park, [or] other "OPEN" areas of this state to be outdoor locations. Also note that there is no specific authority to suspend political events. A public meeting, however, is an indoor event, which isnot within the authority of the governor to prohibit. It is a 17political activity, which by its very nature is very different then a public street, public park, [or] other OPEN areas of this state.Further note that RCW 43.06.220(1)(a) only autherizes the setting of curfew times [in open spaces]. And RCW 43.06.220(1)(b) only allows the govenor to limit the number of people who may gather. Nothing in RCW 43.06.220 allows a blanket suspension of the Open Public Meetings Act.An additional effect of suspending the Open Public Meetings Act is that it burdens select groups with undue harshipin participating in their government. Rural residents, with limited broadband, lower income people with limitted access to technology and minorities including people of color are also adversly affected. The limiting access to open government amount to a form of voter suppression. By prividing only hi-tech access to government the Governor created an elitest class that have access to government.18For the Attorney General, in Response Brief Pg. 29, to suggest that the first amendment does not inherently grant members of the public to be heard by public bodies, i.e., bodies of government, it strikes are the fundamental root of a free and open democracy. The Attorney General may have well said that voting itself is not a right of the public. While it is true that the OPMA is neither a federal act, not existent in every state, the OPMA simply codifies a right that is already known and accepted to exist, that the public HAS the right to participate fully in government. But even with that said, Governor Inslee's Proclamation did not declare that the public did not have a rightto public participation, but rather that there would be a socioeconomic bar that must first be vaulted in order to attain that right. That bar being: Access to broadband, being able to afford broadband that can support streaming technology and being financially able to afford the hardware to uses this 19technology. Placing such financial barriers to a fundamental right is no different than a poll tax.While a poll tax is 1) a fixed fee; and 2) a fee for voting, access to government bodies is an extension of voting and by requiring a citizen to first have expensive hardware and broadband there becomes a relation to wealth tied to access to government. The Court noted in Harper v. Virginia, that "a state violates the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S.Constitution whenever it makes the affluence of the voter or payment of any fee an electoral standard. Voter qualifications have no relation to wealth." “Linesdrawn on the basis of wealth or property, like those of race, are traditionally disfavored. P. 383 U.S. 668.”“Classifications which might impinge on fundamental rights and liberties -- such as the franchise -- must be closely scrutinized. P. 383 U.S. 670.” Harper v. Virginia State Board of Elections, 383 U.S. 663 (1966) Further note that we do not claim that suspenton of the OPMA is simply a free speeh issue, it is a fundamental 20 American principle that Americans have a right participate in their goverment. It is further a matter of discrimination to create a system that allows some classes and not others to participate in their government.The Governor knows the fundemental principles of our government, he took an oath to uphold our principles of freedom and democracy. His actions here were wrong and he knew or should have KNOWN they were wrong, the court mustfind this charge legally and factually sufficient and allow the voters to decide.Charge 4. Violation of RCW 43.06.220 (2)(g)(iii)Governor Inslee exceeded statutory authority granted in RCW 43.06.220(2)(g) by suspending people’s rights to peaceably assemble by limiting the number of people allowed to attend a single gathering under Proclamations 20-05, 20-06, 20-07, 20-11, and subsequent Proclamations. Such a violation 21results in a valid claim for misfeasance, a violation of the Governor’s oath of office, or both; either result subjects the Governor to recall. RCW 43.06.220(2)(g)(iii) States: “(iii) the waiver or suspension would conflict with the rights, under the First Amendment, of freedom of speech or of the people to peaceably assemble.”Our charge does not focus on the underlying meaning of free speech or freedom of assembly, those should be self-evident. Rather our charge focuses on the governor's direct violation of the statute in question.We have presented affidavits from a citizen who applied for a permit for freedom of assembly but was denied by direct orders from the governor. Although there are many more such examples, it seemed unnecessary to present affidavits from all similar applicants.As we have stated, the Governor KNEW that to suspend freedom of assembly or free speech was wrong, he proceeded toviolate the statute that he signed into law on May 21, 2019, 22which prohibited him from violating those freedoms. See SB 5260.Knowingly undertaking an unlawful act is general intent. When Governor Inslee made the Proclamation, and underlying direction to Department of Enterprise Services to prevent the issuance of permits for public (political) assembly he knowingly violated RCW 43.06.220(2)(g)(III).On May 21st, 2019, Governor Jay Inslee signed into law SB 5260, which added RCW 43.06.220(g)(2)(iii) to the statute. In the Attorney General's Response Brief pg. 32, it is claimed that we allege a First Amendment violation of freedom of assembly, however we did not allege specifically such a violation. That is to say such violation were clear and obvious and required no allegation. What our charge alleges is that Governor Inslee VIOLATED RCW 43.06.220(g)(2)(iii). Since we did not cast this as a First Amendment challenge, and only as a statutory challenge, it is unnecessary to make any content 23neutral argument. Had we wanted to make a contentual argument we could simply have argued that BLM had never been denied a person for assemble. But since content is NOT relevant for a statutory claim it wasn't required.In City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc.,475 U.S. 41 (1986), the city made content based zoning ordinance, and therefor was a challenge to the First Amendment. But this case does not have any application to our charge and it is only a distraction because we are only challenging the adherence to RCW 43.06.220(2)(h)(iii). The Attorney General should have this for a case where something is being challenged specificallyon constitutional grounds.Again, in Ward v. Rock against Racism, 491 U.S. 781 (1989), we have a constitutional challenge, rather than a statutory challenged. Even so, in Ward, it was recognized that Rock had the right to play amplified music, as a right of freedom of expression. Only noting that there was a time, place,24and manner restriction on speech. When Governor Inslee violated RCW 43.06.220(2)(h)(iii), he placed NO time, place ormanner exceptions, though even if he did we still would likely have a statutory argument. If the Legislature had intended to allow regulations of rights in RCW 43.06.220(2)(h)(iii), they should be included them in the statute itself.In the Response Brief pg. 33, the Attorney General claims that Governor Inslee did not have a “disagreement with the message”, of those applying for an assembly permit, but there is NO evidence provided to support this and we are askedto take this on faith. In fact, at every press conference during 2020, the Governor expressed biases against his opponents, in the strongest language. But, even if he agreed with the message,the Governor still had no right to deny an assembly permit, according to the statute.25In the end, regardless of motive, it is an inescapable fact that the Governor violated RCW43.06.220(2)(h)(iii), and that such a violation is a serious, recallable wrong and that there more than sufficient evidence that he both committed the offense and that he KNEW what he was doing was a violation of the law, a law that he had signed into effect a year earlier. The court must find this to be both legally and factually sufficient and all the charge to go to the voters.Charge 5. The Governor does NOT have the authority todeclare a state of emergency for a medical situation.On February 29th, 2020 and beyond, the Governor issuedall of the Covid-19 pandemic Proclamations without just cause as he failed to make a finding that a public disorder, disaster, energy emergency, or riot existed in the State of Washington due to Covid-19. Such a finding is a condition precedent to declaring a state of emergency and is required by RCW 43.06.010(12). The Governor’s illegal Covid-19 Proclamations 26result in a valid claim for misfeasance, a violation of the Governor’s oath of office, or both; either result subjects the Governor to recall. At issue here is whether the Governor has the authority todeclare a state of emergency for a medical situation. RCW 43.06.010 (12):The governor may, after finding that a publicdisorder, disaster, energy emergency, or riot existswithin this state or any part thereof which affectslife, health, property, or the public peace, proclaima state of emergency in the area affected, and thepowers granted the governor during a state of emergencyshall be effective only within the area described in the proclamation; When determining the meaning of what a disaster is, we must use “history and tradition”. Since 1968 there have been eight governors, and until Governor Inslee not one of them felt that a disaster could be interpreted as a medical situation. Not during the Hong Kong Flu A of 1969, nor the Russian Flu of 1977, notany other of the pandemics that have occurred over the years. 27In fact, every other governor UNDERSTOOD that a disaster meant NATURAL disaster. They also understood that declaring a state of emergency was an extreme act that had to be exercised with caution, this is evidenced by the relatively few emergency declarations over the years. Every disaster until Governor Inslee was due to: floods, fires, a volcano or extreme weather.The estimated number of deaths was 1 million worldwide and about 100,000 in the United States. Most excess deaths were inpeople 65 years and older. In Washington State, the peak effect of the H3N2 virus was December 14th, 1968. So, the effect of the H3N2 virus was very much in the forefront of current events when SB 392 was being debated, yet there is no mentionof medical emergency in the bill as a reason for a state of emergency.The statute for declaring an emergency was updated again in the 1970s to add, “energy emergency” to the list of 28reason for declaring an emergency, and still no addition of “medical emergency. As former Justice Antonin Scalia has said,“[a law] Says what it says and doesn't SAY what it doesn't say”.The Washington Supreme Court has not directly addressed the legality of Proclamation 20-05 and the subsequent proclamations, (Slidewaters LLC v. Washington State Dept. of Labor), which only leave the analysis of how Washington governors have understood RCW 3.06.220(2)(h)(iii).As a counter to our dictionary argument regarding the meaning of “disaster”, in the Attorney General's Response Brief pg. 42, cites a 2022 dictionary. Our definition comes froma 1968 dictionary, the year before the Emergency Powers Act was passed. However, our study of the actions of each governorand the legislatures since 1969 overwhelmingly demonstrates that “disaster” mean exactly “natural disaster”. We examined 29what the legislature wrote into the proposed statute, the statute as passed (1969) and the changes made to it over the years (1977 and 2019). Its meaning is clearly NATURAL “disaster”.The Attorney General's Response Brief pg. 44 cites RCW 38.52.010(9)(a) reaching for a counter definition of the meaning of “disaster”. This however, creates an amusing error. Title 38 specifically covers “militia and military” and while it has a definition section, which includes a definition of “disaster”, that definition is exclusively for the militia and military department. While it is true that after the Governor declares a state of emergency, he can [and did], mobilize the state militia, definitions within Title 38 cannot be applied to RCW 43.06.220. The only definitions that apply to the declaration of a state of emergency are RCW 43.06.220(2)(h)(iii). This is clarified by RCW 38.52.010(9)(a):“(9)(a) "Emergency or disaster" as used in all sections of this chapter”.30Again, the court must recognize that we are not making any claims regarding Covid-19, either its existence, severity or number of people affected, only that no medical situation qualifies as grounds for a declaration of emergency. Recall that in 1968 a devastating flu killed over 100,000 but the Legislaturedid not include any reference to a “medical” disaster. Also, a statute should be interpreted using standard and accepted canons of construction, which leaves no reasonable interpretation of a medical disaster. Both legal and factual sufficiency is overwhelming. The court's responsibility is limited. It is not the privilege of the court to make a determination as to guilt or innocence, only to be the gate keeper, to prevent frivolous charges. This charge is far from frivolous and is robust with substantial reasoning. With so much to consider it is right for the people to evaluate all of the evidence and make their own decision.31III.CONCLUSIONRemoving a public official, especially a state executive, must not be taken lightly. One must consider potential disrup-tion and expense. But when in the course of civic events it be-comes necessary to preserve our democracy and where the law-lessness is egregious enough, that elected official must be held accountable and our state must be restored to peace and free-dom. We have developed charges that show acts that are so egregious, substantial and harmful to justify a removal from of-fice, with the guilt of these charges to be determined by a vote of the people. These charges are of such a nature that even many of the Governor's supporters will likely vote for his recall.Even though we as Washingtonians have many divisions, we should at the least be united by the rule of law, and the impor-tance of our democratic institutions.32In both our opening brief and this reply we have shown his-tory and legal detail to support the sufficiency of our charges. We have not confused the situation with extraneous arguments that would only serve to divert attention from the core issues. On the surface Governor Inslee's actions were wrong: Malfea-sance, Misfeasance and violations of oath of office. There existsan abundance of evidence of wrongdoing, both presented throughout these proceedings and existent elsewhere, that demonstrates factual and legal sufficiency.In the name of justice, democracy and the right of recall by the people of Washington, we respectfully this court to reverse the Superior Court's decision and let the people decide the fate of the Governor, allowing the recall to proceed.Pursuant to RAP 18.17, I hereby certify there are 5168 words in this brief as indicated by the word processing programused in preparation.33Dated this 22nd day of February, 2022./ss/______________________________C Davis, Proponent, Pro Se2103 Harrison Ave NWPMB 2164Olympia, WA 98502recallinslee@gmail.com34DECLARATION OF SERVICEI declare that I sent for service a true and correct copy of this pleading on all parties or their counsel of record on the datebelow as follows:Sent Via Email: Sent Via Email: Alan D.CopseyAlan.Copsy@atg.wa.govPeter B.GonickPeter.Gonick@atg.wa.govOffice of the Attorney GeneralPO Box 401001125 Washington Street SEOlympia, WA 98504-0100I declare under penalty of perjury under the laws of the state of Washington that the foregoing is true and correct.DATED this 22nd day of February, 2022 at Olympia, Washington./ss/______________________________C Davis, Proponent Pro Se35WASHINGTONIAN TO RECALL INSLEEFebruary 22, 2022 - 1:16 AMTransmittal InformationFiled with Court:Appellate Court Case Number: 99948-1Appellate Court Case Title:Superior Court Case Number:Supreme CourtIn the Matter of the Recall of Jay Inslee21-2-00968-2The following documents have been uploaded:• 999481_Briefs_20220222011255SC240923_9830.pdf This File Contains: Briefs - Appellants Reply The Original File Name was REPLY TO RESPONSE BRIEF.pdfA copy of the uploaded files will be sent to:• • • SGOOlyEF@atg.wa.govjeffrey.even@atg.wa.govpeter.gonick@atg.wa.govComments:Reply brief for In Re Recall Inslee 99948-1Sender Name: c davis - Email: recallinslee@gmail.com Address: 2103 Harrison Ave NW#2164 Olympia, WA, 98502 Phone: (360) 824-1613Note: The Filing Id is 20220222011255SC240923