FILED 
Court of Appeals 
Division Ill 
State of Washington 
71812021  12:13 PM 
No. 37019-4-III 

99959-7

IN THE SUPREME COURT 

OF THE STATE OF WASHINGTON 

STATE OF WASHINGTON, Respondent 

v. 

JOSEPH ZAMORA, Petitioner 

APPEAL FROM THE SUPERIOR COURT 

OF GRANT COUNTY 

THE HONORABLE JUDGE JOHN M. ANTOSZ 

PETITION FOR REVIEW 

_____________________________________________________ 

Marie J. Trombley, WSBA 41410 
Attorney for J. Zamora 
PO Box 829 
Graham, WA 
253-445-7920

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

I.	

IDENTITY OF PETITIONER .................................................. 1	

II.	

COURT OF APPEALS DECISION .......................................... 1	

III.	

ISSUES PRESENTED FOR REVIEW ...................................... 1	

A.	 Did	The	State	Violate	Defendant's	Right	To	An	Impartial	

Jury	By	Beginning	Voir	Dire	and	Repeatedly	Asking	The	Panel	

Their	Views	on	Border	Security	And	Fears	of	Becoming	Crime	

Victims	By	Undocumented	Immigrants. .................................. 1	

B.	 As a matter of first impression, was Mr. Zamora’s 

constitutional right to present a full and complete defense violated 

where the trial court denied him the opportunity to cross examine 

police witnesses on the circumstances of their Garrity statements?1 	

C.	 As a matter of first impression, in the circumstance where a 

defendant is seized by an unconstitutional act by law enforcement, 

and brutally beaten by officers, entitling him to a defense of self-

defense, must evidence of the defendant’s alleged assault of 

officers be suppressed? ............................................................. 1	

D.	Was Mr. Zamora’s right to effective assistance of counsel 

violated where counsel did not object to the State’s motion to 

i 

 
preclude all evidence of prior violent confrontations in which the 

officer involved in his beating was involved? ............................. 2	

IV.	

STATEMENT OF THE CASE ................................................. 2	

V.	

ARGUMENT WHY REVIEW SHOULD BE ACCEPTED ....... 10	

A.	 The State Violated Mr. Zamora’s Constitutional Right To An 

Impartial Jury Requiring Reversal. .......................................... 10	

B.	 As A Matter Of First Impression, Mr. Zamora’s Constitutional 

Right To Present A Full And Complete Defense Was Violated 

Where The Trial Court Denied Him The Opportunity To Cross 

Examine Police Witnesses On The Circumstances Of Their Garrity 

Statements. ........................................................................... 13	

C.	 As A Matter Of First Impression, Where A Defendant Is 

Seized By An Unconstitutional Act By Law Enforcement, And 

Brutally Beaten By Officers, Entitling Him To A Defense Of Self-

Defense, Evidence Of The Defendant’s Alleged Assault Of 

Officers Must Be Suppressed As Fruit Of The Poisonous Tree. .. 15	

D.	 Mr. Zamora Received Ineffective Assistance of Counsel 

Where Counsel Did Not Object To The State’s Motion To 

Preclude All Evidence Of Prior Violent Confrontations In Which 

The Officers Involved In His Beating Were Involved. ............... 17	

ii 

 
VI.	

CONCLUSION ..................................................................... 20	

iii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES 

Washington Cases 

Cowles Pub. Co. v. State Patrol, 109 Wn.2d 712, 748 P.2d 597 (1988) .. 14 

In re Gentry, 170 Wn.2d 614, 316 P3d 1020 (2014) ................................ 12 

In re Pers.Restraint of Glasmann,175 Wn.2d  696, 286 P.3d 673 (2012) 11 

Seattle Police Officer’s Guild v. City of Seattle, 80 Wn.2d 307, 494 P.2d 

485 (490-91 (1972) ............................................................................... 14 

State v. Aydelotte, 35 Wn.App. 125, 665 P.2d 443 (1983) ....................... 16 

State v. Barber, 118 Wn.2d 335, 823 P.2d 1068 (1992) ........................... 10 

State v. Clark, 143 Wn.2d 731,24 P.3d 1006 (2001) ................................ 19 

State v. Cormier, 100 Wn.App. 457, 997 P.2d 950 (2000) ....................... 15 

State v. Darden,145 Wn.2d 612, 41 P.3d 1189 (2002) ............................. 14 

State v. Jones, 168 Wn.2d 713, 230 P.3d 576 (2010) ............................... 13 

State v. Lile, 188 Wn.2d 766,309 P.3d 1052 (2017) ................................. 13 

State v. Loughbom, 196 Wn.2d 64, 470 P.3d 499 (2020) ......................... 11 

State v. McKinley, 87 Wn.App. 394, 942 P.2d 999 (1997) ....................... 16 

State v. Mierz, 127 Wn.2d 460, 901 P.2d 286 (1995) ............................... 16 

State v. Monday, 171 Wn.2d 667,257 P.3d 551 (2011) ............................ 10 

iv 

 
State v. Orn, 197 Wn.2d 343, 482 P.3d 913 (2021) .................................. 13 

State v. York, 28 Wn.App. 33, 621 P.2d 784 (1980) ................................. 18 

Federal Authorities 

Davis v. Alaska, 415 U.S. 308, 94 S.Ct. 1105, 39 L.Ed.2d 347 (1974) .... 14 

Garrity v. New Jersey, 385 U.S. 493, 87 S.Ct. 616, 17 L.Ed.2d 562 (1967).

............................................................................................................... 14 

Wong Sun v. United States, 371 U.S. 471, 83 S.Ct. 407, 9 L.Ed.2d 441 

(1963) .................................................................................................... 17 

Constitutional Provisions 

Article 1, §22 ............................................................................................ 10 

U.S. Const. Amend. VI ............................................................................. 13 

Court Rules 

ER 608(b) .................................................................................................. 19 

RAP 2.5(a) ................................................................................................ 20 

v 

 
I. 

IDENTITY OF PETITIONER 

Petitioner Joseph Zamora, the appellant below, asks the Court to review 

the decision of Division III of the Court of Appeals referred to in Section 

II below. 

II.  COURT OF APPEALS DECISION 

Joseph Zamora seeks review of the Court of Appeals unpublished opinion 

entered on June 8, 2021. A copy of the opinion is attached. 

III. 

ISSUES PRESENTED FOR REVIEW 

A.  Where the prosecutor begins voir dire and repeatedly asks the 

prospective panel about border security and their fears of becoming crime 

victims by undocumented immigrants in the trial of a defendant with a 

Hispanic surname, has the state violated the defendant’s right to an 

impartial jury?  

B.  As a matter of first impression, was Mr. Zamora’s constitutional 

right to present a full and complete defense violated where the trial court 

denied him the opportunity to cross examine police witnesses on the 

circumstances of their Garrity statements?  

C.  As a matter of first impression, in the circumstance where a 

defendant is seized by an unconstitutional act by law enforcement, and 

brutally beaten by officers, entitling him to a defense of self-defense, must 

evidence of the defendant’s alleged assault of officers be suppressed?  

1 

 
 
D.  Was Mr. Zamora’s right to effective assistance of counsel violated 

where counsel did not object to the State’s motion to preclude all evidence 

of prior violent confrontations in which the officer involved in his beating 

was involved? 

IV. 

STATEMENT OF THE CASE 

Grant County prosecutors charged Joseph Zamora with two counts 

of assault in the third degree, based on events which occurred on Super 

Bowl Sunday evening 2017. CP 1-2. He walked by way of a vacant lot on 

the way to his niece’s home. RP 287, 736. A neighbor noticed him 

trudging through a foot of snow. RP 326, 744. As he walked by parked 

cars she shouted that the lot was private property and he needed to leave. 

She never saw him look into, touch, or press up against cars. RP 289-90, 

308. He continued shuffling down the street. RP 301-302. She called 911 

anyway, to report “a suspicious person in our neighborhood…possibly car 

prowling.” RP 302.  

Kevin Hake1 responded to the call, arriving within 30 seconds. RP 

313-14,317. He shined his flashlight at Mr. Zamora, who was about 20 

feet away, in the yard of his niece’s home. He yelled, “Hey I need to talk 

to you, come on over.” RP 320, 450. Mr. Zamora returned and stopped 

1 At the time of the incident, Officer Hake worked for the Moses Lake Police 
Department. He left their employment four months after the incident. At the time 
of trial he no longer worked in law enforcement and was introduced as Mr. Hake 
rather than Officer Hake. RP 311-12. 

2 

 
 
about six or seven feet from him, his left hand in his pocket with the 

thumb hooked outside of it. RP 320,455. Hake guessed Mr. Zamora may 

have had drugs in the pocket. RP 322. 

Hake started a social encounter, asking for id, where he was going, 

and where he came from. RP 454, 503. Mr. Zamora remained silent and 

did not move. RP 451. Aware that Mr. Zamora did not have to answer his 

questions, Hake nevertheless made a call out over his radio, saying, “I’ve 

got one resisting.” RP 499, 503. Hake testified Zamora was “aggressive” 

by passively resisting interaction with him. RP 323-24, 504-05, 548-49. 

Hake testified he was in fear for his life. RP 548.  

Mr. Zamora turned to walk away. Hake stuck his arm out, told him 

to stop, he was not free to leave. Hake said he was checking “for looking 

in vehicles.” RP 455, 551. Mr. Zamora stopped and then turned away from 

Hake. Even though Mr. Zamora was turned away, Hake thought Mr. 

Zamora put his hand fully in his pocket. RP 455.  

Hake told Mr. Zamora he was not under arrest, and then he 

grabbed him from behind: “I hooked both of his arms…around his elbows 

and pulled him…into my person, and that’s when the struggle started…” 

RP 326. Hake knew the pressure on Mr. Zamora’s elbows would be 

painful. RP 460. Mr. Zamora leaned with Hake’s pull and bowed his 

shoulders. RP 458-59. As Mr. Zamora tried to turn away, Hake attempted 

3 

 
to do a leg sweep to take him to the ground. RP 462. Over the mic another 

officer heard Hake say, “Put your hands behind your back, I’ll fucking kill 

you, put your hands behind your back.” RP 644.  

Hake immediately shoved Mr. Zamora as hard as he could, sending 

Mr. Zamora backward six or seven feet. RP 464-65. Mr. Zamora fell, and 

hit his head on a truck bumper. RP 465, 467. Hake “jumped on top of him 

and grabbed him by the left wrist with both hands.” RP 344-45. They both 

slid under the truck. RP 344. 

Hake initially testified Mr. Zamora tried to strangle him with his 

lapel mic cord, and he punched Mr. Zamora twice in the face. RP 469, 

472. He later admitted he felt no constriction and the loop was never 

around his neck. RP 472. Mr. Zamora did not swing his fists or try to 

punch. RP 472. Hake grabbed him from under the truck, wrestled his way 

on top of him, and used a chokehold on Mr. Zamora. RP 472-73. He heard 

him gasp and then no sound. He believed deadly force was authorized. RP 

548.  

As he straddled Mr. Zamora, Hake felt him grab at his utility belt 

and holstered gun. He said he moved Mr. Zamora’s hands away from the 

gun three times. RP 474. He admitted that were Mr. Zamora trying to get 

out from underneath him he would have used the belt as leverage. RP 479-

80.  

4 

 
 
The beating continued, with Hake shooting pepper spray into Mr. 

Zamora’s mouth and face, and punching Mr. Zamora between 75 and 120 

times on the face, eyes, ears, nose and rib cage. RP 368, 506-07, 515. Mr. 

Zamora bucked to get free and would not allow himself to be handcuffed. 

RP 492-93. He reportedly hit Hake in the shoulder and torso area. RP 506.  

Hake stuck his gun in Mr. Zamora’s ear and eye. RP 369. When 

Mr. Zamora bit down on the barrel, Hake shoved the gun down his throat 

as far as possible. He kept the gun on Mr. Zamora until another officer 

arrived. RP 370, 514. He then punched Mr. Zamora as hard as he could 

another 12-20 times. RP 375. Backup officers arrived within minutes. 

They tased2 Mr. Zamora simultaneously and repeatedly. They pepper 

sprayed him, punched him in the head, used knee strikes, and kicked him. 

RP 526, 630-31, 653, 692-93, 828. It took between three and four minutes 

to handcuff Mr. Zamora. RP 376. Officers used a rope to hog tie him. RP 

637. While he was being hog-tied Mr. Zamora landed one kick to an 

officer who said it did not hurt him. RP 650.  

Another officer activated his body camera after Mr. Zamora was 

hogtied, and officers could be heard calling him a “turd.” RP 680. A 

search of Mr. Zamora’s jacket yielded a pockeknife. RP 711, 741. 

2 Officers testifie they used the tasers in ’drive stun.’ Drive stun is the use of a 
taser without probes: it emits an arc that causes more pain. Rp 377, 632, 691-92.  

5 

 
 
 
 
Handcuffed, hog-tied and face down in the snow Mr. Zamora stopped 

breathing. RP 676, 680-81.   

A witness, who observed the events unfold in his front yard, 

testified that Mr. Zamora did not resist or fight the officer. Rather, Hake 

put his hands on Mr. Zamora and threw him to the ground. RP 826. When 

the other officers arrived he saw them kick, punch, and elbow Mr. Zamora 

as he lay face down in the snow. RP 826. He heard Mr. Zamora say, “I 

can’t breathe” and “you’re choking me.” RP 836. He saw an officer using 

a chokehold on Mr. Zamora after he had been hog-tied. RP 839.  

Paramedics arrived to find Mr. Zamora still hog tied, with officers 

holding him face down in the snow. RP 843-44. The EMT administered 

defibrillations to restart his heart two times. RP 847. Comatose, Mr. 

Zamora was transported to a hospital. He remained comatose and was 

moved by Life Flight to a Spokane hospital. RP 847-50. Photos on the first 

or second day of his hospital stay in ICU showed him with facial bruising, 

a feeding tube and an intubated ventilator. Exh. 14; RP 782, 784. A second 

photo taken a month later showed him in a hospital bed with bruising on 

his body and a trach. Exh. 15. 

Mr. Zamora tested positive for methamphetamines and THC. RP 

585, 598. The physician testified the half-life for meth is 12 hours, which 

6 

 
 
 
 
meant methamphetamine ingested within a three-day window would 

qualitatively show positive but was not quantified3. RP 574, 612-14.  

The Investigation: Washington State Patrol investigated the 

charges of assault in the third degree brought against Mr. Zamora. RP 734-

42. None of the officers prepared a police report, but, were instructed from 

an unnamed higher ranked person to prepare a Garrity statement. 4 No 

officer involved in the incident sat down for an interview with the WSP 

investigator. RP 233.  

Pre-Trial Motions: Before trial, the State moved to bar reference to 

the internal investigation into the officers’ conduct. CP 164; RP 330. It 

wanted the statements the officers made regarding the investigation to be 

called “statements recorded about the incident.” CP 164. Defense counsel 

objected as the officer information about the events was found only in the 

Garrity statements. RP 233, 325.  

The court denied the defense motion to question the officers (1) if 

they made a Garrity statement; (2) whether they knew what a Garrity 

3 Mr. Zamora remembered smoking meth two or three days earlier but did not 
remember if he had smoked any on the day of the beating. RP   738.  
4 A Garrity statement is a statement made by a public employee during an 
internal investigation. The Fifth Amendment prohibits the government from using 
the self-incriminating statements made by a public employee under threat of 
termination in a subsequent criminal prosecution. Garrity v., New Jersey, 385 
U.S. 493, 499-500, 87 S.Ct. 616, 17 L.Ed.2d 562 (1967).   

7 

 
 
 
 
 
statement was; (3) what their understanding was of the reason for making 

a Garrity statement; (4) who told them to make the statement; (5) whether 

the officers made themselves available for interview by the WSP for 

purposes of investigating the case against Mr. Zamora. RP 401-02, 419-

20. The court found the statements inadmissible, the questions irrelevant, 

and a waste of time. RP 340, 433-34.  

Without defense objection, the court granted a state motion to 

exclude evidence of any prior violent confrontations involving Hake and 

other citizens. CP 90. Without defense objection, the court also granted a 

state motion that no evidence of what led to Hake’s resignation from the 

police force would be admitted. RP 12, 30.  

Voir Dire: The prosecutor began voir dire:  

…let’s just take a general topic that seems to be in the media every 
day, and I’ll ask you a general question, and that is some people 
say today in our society we have - - we don’t have enough border 
security. Some people say we have too much or we don’t need that. 
So, the question is which one do you feel like you’re closer to?  

RP 71-72. 

When a juror stated he believed immigration was an "opportunity 

for a lot of great people to come to our country," the prosecutor answered:  

Sorry for this, and I don’t mean to get off on a jag, could you make 
room for the possibility that someone who – a loved one or family 
member of somebody who was either killed or had problems with 
somebody that’s been previously deported or criminally is wrong 
in the country, that that happens to them, and that they feel like we 
need more border security, can you make room for that?  

8 

 
 
 
RP 75.  

At another point, he said: 

Can you make room for the idea that when they hear that 100,000 
people come across illegally a month, and of those we’ve got 
people from countries that - - countries on our list that aren’t even 
allowed in the country are part of that group? 

RP 77.  

The prosecutor referenced and questioned potential jurors about illegal 

immigration and undocumented immigrants no less than 10 times. RP 74-

105,160. The following day the court expressed its concern that defense 

counsel had not objected to the State’s questions. RP 221. The court raised 

evidence rule 413, cited numerous cases and said it was concerned a jury 

would:  

…think that with a Latino last name that he’s here illegally?  Why 
else would the questions be asked? Why else would there be 
reference to drug busts in Nogales, a number of illegal immigrants 
crossing over the border, 100,000 a month, unless he was, why else 
would the questions be relevant? That’s what the jury might think. 
RP 223. 

The prosecutor said he asked the questions because border security 

was a hot topic and he was curious about it. RP 225. He said he was 

troubled by “this overarching complete political correctness about what 

people have to say and concerns, and I understand that. But it is a major 

concern that’s imposed on Grant County as well. It’s a significant 

9 

 
 
 
problem. I’ll be careful about any of that.” RP 226. During opening 

statements, defense counsel said Mr. Zamora was a U.S. citizen. RP 265.  

Mr. Zamora raised a defense of self-defense. (2/20/19 RP 6). A 

jury found him guilty, and he gave notice of appeal. CP 333-35. The Court 

of Appeals affirmed the convictions while acknowledging the case was 

one “in which a citizen’s mistaken report of vehicle prowling almost 

resulted in the death of an individual who, until seized by a police officer 

was guilty of nothing more than walking while high on drugs.” Op. at 

33,36.   

V.  ARGUMENT WHY REVIEW SHOULD BE ACCEPTED 

A.  The State Violated Mr. Zamora’s Constitutional Right To An 

Impartial Jury Requiring Reversal.  

A prosecutor violates a defendant’s Washington State Constitution 

Article 1, §22 right to an impartial jury when he resorts to racist argument 

and appeals to racial stereotypes or racial bias to achieve convictions. 

State v. Monday, 171 Wn.2d 667, 676, 257 P.3d 551 (2011). Washington 

Courts condemn the injection of racial or ethnic stereotypes into criminal 

cases. State v. Barber, 118 Wn.2d 335, 346-47, 823 P.2d 1068 (1992).  

Where a defendant fails to object to alleged prosecutorial 

misconduct, the appellate court determines whether the comments are 

flagrant and ill-intentioned to determine whether reversal is required. In re 

10 

 
 
 
Pers. Restraint of Glasmann, 175 Wn.2d  696, 286 P.3d 673 (2012). This 

Court analyzed prosecutorial misconduct in State v. Loughbom, 196 

Wn.2d 64, 470 P.3d 499 (2020). There, the Court was less concerned 

about the subjective aspect of flagrant and ill-intentioned comments, and 

more focused on whether the jury would draw improper inferences from 

the evidence based on the comments.  

In Loughbom, the State asked whether potential jurors believed 

there was a drug problem in the county, and then referenced the “war on 

drugs” in opening and closing arguments. The Court held the appeal to a 

war on drugs influenced the jury because it was designed to arouse passion 

and prejudice and to inflame the juror’s emotions. The prosecution’s 

framing of the prosecution as a drug problem and a war on drugs created a 

thematic narrative prism through which the jury should view the evidence. 

Id. at 76-77.  

Here, the narrative introduced by the prosecutor was border 

security: undocumented immigrants committing crimes and burglaries in 

Grant County neighborhoods. It moved on to the prosecutor referencing a 

Fentanyl operation in Nogales that “would have killed 65 million 

Americans.” RP 145.  

The Court of Appeals acknowledged “the border security and 

illegal immigration …questioning was irrelevant and unnecessarily 

11 

 
 
politicized it.” Op. at 33. However, it excused the conduct pointing out 

defense counsel could have objected to the questioning and the trial court 

would have been well within its authority to instruct the prosecutor the 

topics were off-limits. Op. at 34. Instructing the prosecutor not to inject 

racially biased questions does not change the influence it had already had 

on the jury. Under Loughbom, the analysis used by the Court of Appeals 

and its conclusion are incorrect. The issue is whether Mr. Zamora’s right 

to an impartial jury was violated by the State.  

Under In re Gentry, 170 Wn.2d 614, 316 P3d 1020 (2014), the 

burden is on the State to show race-based misconduct was harmless 

beyond a reasonable doubt. Here, the prosecutor intentionally returned to 

the theme of illegal immigration and the fear of the possibility of crimes 

by undocumented immigrants coming from the Southern border no less 

than 10 times. “When a prosecutor flagrantly or apparently intentionally 

appeals to racial bias in a way that undermines the defendant’s credibility 

or the presumption of innocence” the Court will vacate the conviction 

unless it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that the misconduct did not 

affect the jury’s verdict.” State v. Monday, 17 Wn.2d at 680.  

This Court should accept review because the ruling by the Court of 

Appeals conflicts with a ruling by this Court. The repeated questioning 

based on racial bias and stereotypes violated and undermined Mr. 

12 

 
Zamora’s right to an impartial jury and the burden lies with the State to 

prove otherwise.  

B.  As A Matter Of First Impression, Mr. Zamora’s Constitutional 

Right To Present A Full And Complete Defense Was Violated 

Where The Trial Court Denied Him The Opportunity To Cross 

Examine Police Witnesses On The Circumstances Of Their Garrity 

Statements.  

The right to confront and cross-examine an adverse witness is 

guaranteed by both state and federal constitutions. U.S. Const. Amend. VI, 

art. 1, §22. Violation of the right is a constitutional error and requires 

reversal unless the State can show beyond a reasonable doubt the violation 

did not contribute to the verdict. State v. Jones, 168 Wn.2d 713, 724, 230 

P.3d 576 (2010). “Any fact that goes to the trustworthiness of a witness 

may be elicited if it is germane to the issue” State v. Lile, 188 Wn.2d 766, 

792, 309 P.3d 1052 (2017). Where a defendant can show evidence is. 

minimally relevant, it must be admitted unless the State can show a 

compelling interest for excluding it: it must be a strong showing that it is 

unfairly prejudicial. State v. Jones, 168 Wn.2d at 724. Where a trial 

court’s decision to exclude evidence violates constitutional protections, 

the State carries the burden of proving beyond a reasonable doubt the 

constitutional error was harmless. State v. Orn, 197 Wn.2d 343, 482 P.3d 

913 (2021).  

13 

 
Only two cases in Washington mention the use of Garrity5 

statements by law enforcement officers. Seattle Police Officer’s Guild v. 

City of Seattle, 80 Wn.2d 307, 494 P.2d 485 (490-91 (1972); Cowles Pub. 

Co. v. State Patrol, 109 Wn.2d 712, 748 P.2d 597 (1988)6. There is no 

precedent that controls this particular issue. 

The Court of Appeals agreed that evidence that impeaches or 

discredits a witness is relevant. Op. at 26. However, the Court found the 

evidence not even minimally relevant because the fact of their statements 

would arguably enhance their credibility. Op. at 27.  

The Court’s reasoning conflicts with long standing decisions on 

cross examination rights, and this Court’s recent decision in Orn. (See 

State v. Darden,145 Wn.2d 612, 41 P.3d 1189 (2002); Davis v. Alaska, 

415 U.S. 308, 94 S.Ct. 1105, 39 L.Ed.2d 347 (1974)). In Orn, this Court 

held the defendant’s right to confrontation and to present a complete 

defense was violated when he was barred from cross-examining the 

State’s key witness, a confidential information, in order to expose the 

witness’s bias. Orn, 197 Wn.2d at 347-48.  

5 Garrity v. New Jersey, 385 U.S. 493, 87 S.Ct. 616, 17 L.Ed.2d 562 (1967). 
6 Neither case involved use of the statements in a criminal prosecution of a 
citizen. 

14 

 
 
This Court held the trial court violated Orn’s Sixth amendment 

rights when it “effectively hides the fact that the prosecution’s key witness 

worked as a confidential informant for the same police department that 

investigated the case.” Id. at 351. Similarly, the “right to cross-examine 

for bias is especially important where, as here, that bias stems from a 

witness’s motive to cooperate with the State based on the possibility of 

leniency or the desire to avoid prosecution.” Orn, 197 Wn.2d at 352.  

Here, at stake for the officers were their careers. The jury was 

precluded from knowing that consequential fact, and Mr. Zamora was 

denied his right to test for credibility and bias. The State made no strong 

showing that admission of that evidence was unfairly prejudicial to the 

State, and under Orn, it could not make such a showing. This issue merits 

review by this Court.  

C.   As A Matter Of First Impression, Where A Defendant Is Seized 

By An Unconstitutional Act By Law Enforcement, And Brutally 

Beaten By Officers, Entitling Him To A Defense Of Self-Defense, 

Evidence Of The Defendant’s Alleged Assault Of Officers Must 

Be Suppressed As Fruit Of The Poisonous Tree. 

Washington law has protected police officers by punishing a 

defendant who physically fights back when he is unlawfully seized. The 

defendant may protect himself only if his life is in imminent danger. In 

State v. Cormier, 100 Wn.App. 457, 997 P.2d 950 (2000), the Court held, 

15 

 
 
“unless a traditional self defense analysis is possible, an unconstitutional 

act by law enforcement does not justify assaultive conduct by an accused 

against a police officer.” Id. at 42-63. In State v. Mierz, 127 Wn.2d 460, 

901 P.2d 286 (1995), the Court held that when an individual assaults an 

officer whose intrusion allegedly violates Fourth amendment protections, 

evidence of the assault is outside the scope of the exclusionary rule.  

The facts here differ from those in State v. McKinley, 87 Wn.App. 

394, 942 P.2d 999 (1997) (police conducted aerial surveillance of 

defendant’s property and defendant raised his shotgun at the helicopter); 

Mierz, (Defendant instructed his dogs to attack wildlife agents who came 

on to his property without a warrant. He claimed self-defense, but not of 

his person) and State v. Aydelotte, 35 Wn.App. 125, 665 P.2d 443 (1983) 

(Defendant pointed a shotgun at officers who came on to his property, 

after he had disobeyed their signal to stop his car, swerved, and possibly 

hit one officer.) The officers entered property and were threatened by the 

defendant in each case.  

In Aydelotte, the Court found the officers did not discover the 

assaults against them by exploiting the illegality of entry to the property, 

and Aydelotte’s actions with the shotgun were sufficiently distinguishable 

from any police illegality to be purged of the primary taint. Aydelotte, 35 

Wn.App. at 132.  

16 

 
The question here is whether evidence of an alleged assault should 

be excluded when an officer does not have probable cause to arrest a 

defendant, physically attacks the defendant without a precipitating event, 

and then arrests him for assault. Evidence of the assault was not 

sufficiently distinguishable from any primary police illegality. Evidence is 

inadmissible as fruit of the poisonous tree where it has been gathered by 

exploitation of the original illegality. Wong Sun v. United States, 371 U.S. 

471, 83 S.Ct. 407, 9 L.Ed.2d 441 (1963).  

In light of recent citizen/law enforcement violent incidents in both 

Washington State and around the country, this issue should be reviewed to 

provide guidance to citizens, police officers, and the courts. 

D.  Mr. Zamora Received Ineffective Assistance of Counsel Where 

Counsel Did Not Object To The State’s Motion To Preclude All 

Evidence Of Prior Violent Confrontations In Which The Officers 

Involved In His Beating Were Involved. 

The Court of Appeals did not rule on the specific issue raised on 

appeal as to whether Mr. Zamora received ineffective assistance of 

counsel where counsel did not object to preclusion of all evidence of prior 

violent confrontations between citizens and Hake. Hake was dispatched to 

investigate a possible gross misdemeanor. He was the first and only officer 

on the scene, was not wearing a body cam, and repeatedly stated he had 

never been in a situation in which he was so frightened. By his own 

17 

 
testimony, he escalated the situation without waiting for backup. Without 

provocation, he grabbed, shoved, punched, and pepper sprayed Mr. 

Zamora. Mr. Zamora had a constitutional right to test the credibility and 

veracity of Hake’s testimony that he had never before been in such a 

situation. He had the right to question whether Hake had a history of use 

of excessive force.  

As argued on appeal, in York, an undercover investigator was the 

only eyewitness to the alleged crime. State v. York, 28 Wn.App. 33, 34, 

621 P.2d 784 (1980). To test motive and credibility, the defendant wanted 

to elicit information about York’s previous employment as a sheriff from 

which he had been fired. The State brought out favorable aspects of his 

law enforcement background but moved to limit cross examination on the 

unfavorable elements. The trial court granted it, considering it a collateral 

matter. On review, the Court found “as a matter of fundamental fairness” 

the defense should have been allowed to examine the negative elements of 

the State’s most important witness. Id. at 37. The attempt to minimize the 

relevance of the witness’s employment and firing was of sufficient 

importance to obtain pretrial suppression. Id. Credibility of the witness 

was at the center of the defense.  

Here, the State elicited information about Hake’s 13-year 

background with Grant County Youth Services, his completion of the 

18 

 
juvenile services probation academy, and his training in mental health. Of 

particular significance was testimony that Hake was a certified instructor 

in aggression replacement training intervention. RP 312. The jury heard 

the favorable aspects of Hake’s law enforcement which would lend 

credibility to his observations, but like York, none of the unfavorable 

aspects. Any previous incidents of violence were of sufficient importance 

to obtain pretrial suppression. In closing argument, the State emphasized 

Hake’s “amazing restraint”: “…the defendant is alive today here with us 

in this courtroom because of the amazing restraint that officer hake 

showed…It was a deadly force situation. He could have shot and killed the 

defendant. …Officer Hake showed restraint.” RP 890.  

Coupled with Hake’s training and experience in aggression 

replacement, the prosecutor’s argument led the jury to believe Hake was 

the model of restraint.  Under ER 608(b), Mr. Zamora could cross 

examine Hake on specific prior violent conduct, to test his credibility 

because it was probative of his character for truthfulness. State v. Clark, 

143 Wn.2d 731, 766, 24 P.3d 1006 (2001).  

Mr. Zamora’s conviction rested on Hake’s testimony that he had 

used necessary force. The state and federal constitutions guarantee the 

right to effective assistance of counsel. U.S. VI Amendment; Art. I §22 

Washington Constitution. Ineffective assistance of counsel is a manifest 

19 

 
error affecting a constitutional right and can be raised and reviewed for the 

first time on appeal. RAP 2.5(a). Testimony related to Hake’s history of 

using excessive force raises a reasonable probability that but for counsel’s 

failure to object, the result of the proceeding would have been different. A 

reasonable probability in an ineffective assistance of counsel analysis is 

the probability sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome.   

This issue must be reviewed as it presents violation of a 

fundamental constitutional right.  

VI.  CONCLUSION 

Based on the foregoing facts and authorities, Mr. Zamora 

respectfully asks this Court to accept review of his petition.  

Submitted this 8th day of July 2021. 

Marie Trombley 
WSBA 41410 
PO Box 829 
Graham, WA 98338 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FILED 
JUNE 8, 2021 
In the Office of the Clerk of Court 
WA State Court of Appeals, Division III 

IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE STATE OF WASHINGTON 
DIVISION THREE 

STATE OF WASHINGTON, 

Respondent, 

v. 

JOSEPH MARIO ZAMORA, 

Appellant. 

)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
) 

No.  37019-4-III 

UNPUBLISHED OPINION 

SIDDOWAY, J. — After a 911 caller’s dog barked at a person walking down the 

private road in front of her home, she reported that the person appeared to be looking into 

cars.  Joseph Zamora turned out to be walking to the home of his niece.  He proved to be 

high on drugs, however, and the State concedes that after police responded to the 911 

call, a confrontation with Mr. Zamora “escalated far beyond what should have happened 

when a lone officer confronted a suspicious trespasser on a cold, icy winter night.”  Br. of 

Resp’t at 32.  Mr. Zamora’s near death while resisting arrest resulted in an internal police 

investigation and prompts him to make some novel arguments on appeal.   

We affirm the convictions but remand for resentencing. 

FACTS AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND 

On Super Bowl Sunday, February 5, 2017, Joseph Zamora, who was homeless at 

the time, spent time at the home of his brother, James Murphy.  That evening, he decided 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

to walk to where his niece, Alyssa Murphy lived, a few blocks away.  Mr. Zamora later 

admitted to smoking methamphetamine two or three days earlier, but he could not recall 

if he smoked any meth that day.   

At around 9:30 p.m. that evening, then-Moses Lake Police Officer Kevin Hake1 

was on patrol when he received a report of a suspicious person carrying a suitcase and 

looking into vehicles on Space Street.  The complaint had been phoned in by Brandi 

Moncada, who lived on Space Street and reported that an individual wearing “darkish 

clothes” and carrying some sort of bag was lurking around cars parked on the street.  

Report of Proceedings (RP) at 288.  Because of the lack of street lighting, Ms. Moncada 

could not tell if the individual was male or female.  

It had been snowing and road conditions were bad, but Officer Hake was only a 

quarter mile away, so he was able to respond quickly.  When he arrived at Space Street 

he immediately saw what turned out to be Joseph Zamora, carrying some kind of case, 

walking down the road.  Officer Hake and Mr. Zamora were traveling in the same 

direction, so the officer drove beyond him, pulled over, and got out of his patrol car.  He 

signaled with his hand at Mr. Zamora, who was then about 20 feet away, and told Mr. 

Zamora he needed to speak with him.  Mr. Zamora continued to walk toward Officer 

Hake and stopped when he reached him.  

1 Hake was no longer a police officer at the time of trial and was addressed at trial 
as “Mr. Hake.”  We refer to him as Officer Hake in recounting the events of February 5, 
2017, but as Mr. Hake in recounting events at trial and thereafter.   

2 

 
 
 
                                              
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

Officer Hake did not have a body camera and his patrol car dash camera did not 

work.  He would later testify that he proceeded to ask Mr. Zamora where he was going, 

where he was coming from, what his name was, and for identification, but Mr. Zamora 

would not answer.  Instead, Mr. Zamora leaned in to read Officer Hake’s name tag, stood 

back up straight, and stared at him.  Officer Hake became nervous, sensing that 

something was not right.  He claims Mr. Zamora had no expression in his eyes, which he 

described as “the size of silver dollars.”  RP at 321.  Mr. Zamora appeared to be “looking 

through” Officer Hake.  Id.  Officer Hake noticed that Mr. Zamora’s left hand was 

partially in his left pocket and that some of his fingers were holding a boot by pinching it 

against his body.  He appeared to be “fiddling with something” with the fingers in his 

pocket, and Officer Hake thought he might have drugs he was trying to discard.  RP at 

322. 

When Mr. Zamora stepped to his right as if to go around Officer Hake, the officer 

stuck out his arm and told Mr. Zamora he was not free to leave.  He got on his radio and 

said, “I’ve got one resisting.”  RP at 323.  Mr. Hake explained at trial that there had been 

a storm, the roads were icy, and he “wanted to get people coming to my location, because 

I knew it was going to take some time.”  RP at 324.  Even though Mr. Zamora had done 

nothing threatening, Officer Hake was scared and felt “something was going to happen.”  

RP at 324. 

3 

 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

After Officer Hake told Mr. Zamora that deputies needed to speak to him because 

they had a report of someone looking through vehicle windows, Mr. Zamora turned, the 

boot fell from his grip, and the officer saw movement in Mr. Zamora’s left arm.  Officer 

Hake responded by grabbing at Mr. Zamora, hooking Mr. Zamora’s arms at the elbows, 

and trying, unsuccessfully, to use his own leg to sweep Mr. Zamora’s legs out from under 

him.  Officer Hake describes that as being the moment “when the struggle started.”  RP at 

326. 

Blow by blow details of what turned out to be a lengthy struggle between Mr. 

Zamora, Officer Hake, and other officers are immaterial to the issues that Mr. Zamora 

raises on appeal.  Suffice it to say the struggle was intense and unrelenting.  Officer 

Hake, although taller and heavier than Mr. Zamora, realized that Mr. Zamora was 

stronger.  Before other officers arrived, Officer Hake and Mr. Zamora exchanged dozens 

of blows and the officer eventually drew his handgun and placed it against Mr. Zamora’s 

ear, temple, and in his mouth; over the radio, Officer Timothy Welsh heard Officer Hake 

say, “Put your hands behind your back, I’ll fucking kill you.”  RP at 644.  Officer Hake 

was prepared to shoot Mr. Zamora until he heard sirens, assuring him that help was 

coming.    

The arrival of Officer Welsh was not enough to cause Mr. Zamora to quit 

resisting, and even two against one, the officers were unable to handcuff him.  Officer 

Welsh tried to control Mr. Zamora’s left arm, having observed that Officer Hake was 

4 

 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

controlling Mr. Zamora’s right side, but Mr. Zamora was able to “out-muscl[e]” him.  RP 

at 628.  It was only after four more officers arrived that they were able to handcuff Mr. 

Zamora.  He continued kicking and flailing, so they used rope to hobble him; in the 

process of the officers trying hobble his legs, Mr. Zamora managed to kick Officer Welsh 

squarely in the chest.  Officers then tied Mr. Zamora’s hobbled feet to his handcuffs.  

In the course of restraining Mr. Zamora, the officers collectively struck him 

repeatedly, pepper sprayed him in the face twice, and officers Welsh and Omar Ramirez 

used their stun guns to drive stun2 him with five second bursts: Officer Ramirez drive 

stunned Mr. Zamora’s upper body twice, while Officer Welsh drive stunned his lower 

body once.  The officers contended the force was necessary, given Mr. Zamora’s 

unremitting physical resistance and unnatural stamina and strength. 

After Mr. Zamora was successfully restrained, he was moaning, and the officers 

summoned medical aid. 

Responding emergency medical technicians (EMTs) determined on arriving that 

Mr. Zamora was not breathing and had no pulse.  They immediately started CPR,3 

administered oxygen, gave him epinephrine, and administered two defibrillations.  Once 

2 Officer Ramirez testified at trial that to perform a drive stun, probes are removed 

from the stun gun, it is placed in contact with the target’s body, and when fired, it 
delivers a painful electrical arc.  Officers Ramirez and Welsh testified that ordinarily a 
drive stun results in the target’s immediate compliance.  In Mr. Zamora’s case, it 
appeared to have no effect.   

3 Cardiopulmonary resuscitation. 

5 

 
 
 
                                              
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

his heart started again, they transported him to the emergency room of Samaritan 

Hospital in Moses Lake, from which he was transferred to Sacred Heart Hospital in 

Spokane. 

Before the transfer, Mr. Zamora was treated at Samaritan Hospital by Dr. Joshua 

Frank.  Dr. Frank was told that Mr. Zamora had been very aggressive, erratic and 

exceedingly strong when resisting arrest.  The doctor later testified that the most common 

cause of such behaviors would be that the individual was under the influence of a 

substance, usually a stimulant.  A urine sample revealed that Mr. Zamora had 

methamphetamine, amphetamine, and THC4 in his system.  Mr. Zamora’s sister visited 

him at Sacred Heart Hospital shortly after he was admitted and four weeks later, while he 

was still in the intensive care unit.  Photographs she took of him were later admitted at 

trial. 

When police searched Mr. Zamora’s left jacket pocket following his arrest, they 

found a blue handled folding knife with the blade locked open.   

It turned out that the house to which Mr. Zamora was walking was the home of the 

parents of his niece Alyssa’s boyfriend, Crawford, who is the father of her child.  

Crawford’s parents, the Torreses, live on Space Street.  Alyssa had lived in their home for 

two years.  Mr. Zamora’s struggle with police took place in the Torreses’ front yard.  

4 Tetrahydrocannabinol. 

6 

 
 
 
                                              
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

Crawford’s father, Javier Torres, even watched the struggle from his living room 

window, not knowing that Alyssa’s uncle was involved.   

The investigation uncovered no evidence that anyone’s car was broken into that 

night or that any property was stolen.  It turned out that the “suitcase” Mr. Zamora was 

carrying was the case for a DJ Hero music video game.  RP at 744. 

Internal investigation and pretrial motions in limine 

The State did not immediately charge Mr. Zamora.  The lawyer appointed to 

represent him learned from interviewing the six Moses Lake police officers who 

responded to the incident that none had prepared a police report.  An internal 

investigation had been commenced by the Moses Lake Police Department, apparently 

almost immediately.  Responding officers were told by some unidentified person at a 

“higher level” that rather than prepare a report, they would be submitting to an interview.  

RP at 234.  The officers’ interviews were transcribed and produced to defense counsel, 

who discovered that they all included language, consistent with Garrity v. New Jersey, 

385 U.S. 493, 499-500, 87 S. Ct. 616, 17 L. Ed. 2d 562 (1967), that the officers’ 

statements could not be used against them in a criminal prosecution.5  The internal 

investigation apparently found no wrongdoing by the officers.   

5 The statements are not included in the record on appeal, nor was the language 
that defense counsel contended made the statements “Garrity statements” read into the 
record.  This is the implication of counsel’s argument, however. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
                                              
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

The separate investigation into whether Mr. Zamora should be charged was 

referred to Sergeant Matt Andersen of the Washington State Patrol, who spoke to Officer 

Hake briefly on the night of the incident.  Defense counsel learned from officer 

interviews that none of them agreed to be interviewed by Sergeant Andersen; the sergeant 

relied instead on their Garrity statements.  Sergeant Andersen did speak with other 

witnesses, including Mr. Zamora, and wrote a report in September 2017 that 

recommended that charges of assault in the third degree and disarming a law enforcement 

officer be filed against Mr. Zamora.  In May 2018, Mr. Zamora was charged with two 

counts of third degree assault for his alleged assaults of Officer Hake and Officer Welsh.   

Among pretrial motions in limine filed by the State was a motion to exclude 

evidence of a prior confrontation involving Mr. Hake.  The State argued that while Mr. 

Zamora claimed self-defense, he could offer evidence of Mr. Hake’s prior confrontation 

to prove reasonable apprehension only if he was aware of it on February 5, 2017.    

Defense counsel did not oppose the motion.  He told the court he was aware that 

Mr. Hake had been charged with “an assault four and a disorderly conduct by way of 

fighting words” that was subject to a stipulated order of continuance.  RP at 12.  He 

agreed with the State that “[f]or purposes of self-defense, it might be relevant if the 

defendant had known about that prior to this incident.  But that is not my understanding, 

your Honor.”  RP at 12.  The court granted the motion.   

8 

 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

The State also asked the trial court to exclude any reference to the fact that the 

Moses Lake Police Department conducted an internal investigation.  Its motion stated it 

had no objection to the use of statements made during the investigation in accordance 

with the rules of evidence, but asked the court to order that the statements be referred to 

as “statements recorded about the incident” or other similar language.  Clerk’s Papers 

(CP) at 164.    

Defense counsel vigorously objected to any requirement that the officers’ 

statements be referred to in a manner suggesting they were typical officer statements.  He 

argued that he should be able to ask the officers 

 

if they made a Garrity statement as part of an investigation, 

  whether they knew what a Garrity statement was, 

  what their understanding was of the reason for making a Garrity statement, 

  who told them to make a Garrity statement, and 

  whether the officers made themselves available to interview by Sergeant Andersen 

for purposes of his investigation of the case against Mr. Zamora. 

RP 401-02, 419-20.  Defense counsel explained that “the use of an immunized statement 

that . . . can’t be used to prosecute them is something that I would like the jury to know 

about.”  RP at 420. 

The trial court heard extensive argument of the motion and ultimately granted it, 

explaining that asking the officers about whether their statement was a Garrity statement 

and the purpose of such a statement called for legal conclusions.  It found that other 

9 

 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

questions were not relevant and would cause jurors to speculate as to their relevance.  Its 

final concern was that the questions would introduce and waste time on a collateral issue.   

Voir dire  

The trial court allowed each side an hour for voir dire.  The first topic the 

prosecutor offered for discussion was border security: 

[PROSECUTOR:] So first of all, let’s just take a general topic that seems to 
be in the media every day, and I’ll ask you a general question, and that is 
some people say today in our society we have—we don’t have enough 
border security.  Some people say we have too much or we don’t need that.  
So the question is which one do you feel like you’re closer to?  So I’m 
probably going to call on some people and just hear what you have to say 
about that.   

RP at 71-72. 

When one juror said she believed there are a lot of great people who come and 

look for a better opportunity, that she believes in an opportunity for a lot of great people 

to come into our country, and that a rock wall is ridiculous, the prosecutor said to her: 

Sorry for this, and I don’t mean to get off on a jag, could you make room 
for the possibility that someone who—a loved one or family member of 
somebody who was either killed or had problems with somebody that’s 
been previously deported or criminally is wrongly in the country, that that 
happens to them, and that they feel like we need more border security, can 
you make room for that? 

RP at 75.   

When a juror responded she locked her door to protect herself, but did not believe 

in a border wall, the prosecutor said to her: 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

Can you make room for the idea that when they hear that 100,000 people 
come across illegally a month, and of those we’ve got people from 
countries that—countries on our list that aren’t even allowed in the country 
are part of that group? 

. . . . 
. . . That they feel that we’ve got a big problem and a porous border, 
meaning people are just coming across and we don’t know who is here, that 
a lot of people have some fear about that.  Can you make room for that? 

RP at 76-77.  The prosecutor then moved on to whether jurors locked their doors at night, 

whether they had been robbed before, and trespassing.  Its few mentions of immigration 

or the border thereafter were in the context of asking jurors whether they had views on 

any of the topics covered in its hour-long voir dire.   

The next morning, outside the presence of the jury, the trial court asked defense 

counsel if he had a strategic reason for not objecting to the State’s voir dire questioning 

about border security and illegal immigrants.  The court explained that it reviewed ER 

413 and case law after the prior day’s proceedings and had a concern that defense 

counsel’s failure to object might be raised as an issue on appeal.  Defense counsel 

answered that he contemplated objecting.  He also observed that Mr. Zamora is not an 

immigrant.  He explained, however, “I’m not sure that that benefited the state.  That 

might have been to their detriment.  Which is why I didn’t object.  I’m not sure that the 

jury will take those comments as beneficial to the state.”  RP at 221.  Defense counsel  

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

added that the State’s questioning was “discussed back at the office,”6 he planned to 

address it in closing argument, and “I think that it might provide an advantage to me in 

closing argument.”  RP at 221, 224. 

After the trial court explained that it wanted to get defense counsel’s thought 

process on the record in the event of appeal, it asked the prosecutor if there was anything 

he wanted to say.  He responded: 

Well, I’d just say very briefly, your Honor, I guess I’m somewhat surprised 
by that.  I didn’t bring up the specific points that you talked about.  I think 
the general question was I said some people—if the court recalls, some 
people, because this is a hot topic right now, some people feel that we need 
more border security, some people feel we don’t.  I wasn’t suggesting 
anything about the defendant.  I’m just curious about that.  

Because one of the situations we have is about security.  In other 
words, the reason for the question is, from my end, was that, you know, 
following up with did they lock their doors, that kind of thing, because we 
have a situation, a vehicle prowl, that precipitated this whole event.  And so 
I wanted to get their idea about how they—just generally how they felt 
about that.  

They brought up to me some points, I think, in response to things 

that the jurors were saying back to me in response to my general question, 
then I said a couple of things specifically.  But I in no way intimated or was 
suggesting to the jury that the defendant is not a citizen of the country or is 
here illegally.  That was not my intent at all.  I was just simply responding 
to the questions I think they were asking me or our colloquy between us. 

RP at 224-25.  The prosecutor assured the court that the State would not intimate or 

suggest that Mr. Zamora was an illegal immigrant or not a citizen. 

6 There had been a lunch break between the State’s first and second rounds of voir 

dire.   

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                              
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

Shortly thereafter, defense counsel told the court that, with permission, it would 

raise his client’s legal status in opening statement.  The court said he could raise it in a 

nonargumentative way.  During his opening statement, defense counsel said to the jury: 

[DEFENSE COUNSEL:] One of the things that I wanted to address 
right off the bat was yesterday in voir dire you were asked some questions, 
specifically about a border wall, cross border crime, immigrants coming in 
and committing crime, and I had a concern that that might put in your 
minds that there’s an issue of immigration in this case.  There is not.  I 
don’t want you to waste any more time thinking about that or wondering 
when you’re going to hear evidence of that.  My client is a U.S. citizen and 
so that is not at issue in this trial. 

RP at 265.   

Trial 

At trial, the State called as witnesses Ms. Moncada (the 911 caller), Mr. Hake, 

Officer Welsh, three other responding officers, Dr. Frank, and Sergeant Andersen.  The 

defense called as witnesses Mr. Zamora’s sister, the EMTs who responded to the officers’ 

call for medical assistance, and Javier Torres.  Ms. Moncada, the law enforcement 

witnesses, and the medical professionals testified consistent with the facts set forth above. 

Mr. Torres testified that he watched the struggle associated with Mr. Zamora’s 

arrest from a window, but did not know it was Mr. Zamora who was being restrained.  

When asked what he saw, Mr. Torres testified he saw an officer “got the person, put their 

hands on the back and then threw to the floor.”  RP at 825-26.  He did not see fighting 

between Mr. Zamora and Officer Welsh.  When more officers showed up, Mr. Torres 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

testified officers were kicking, punching, and elbowing a man on the ground.  Mr. Torres 

did not see the man on the ground fight back, but did see the officers tie Mr. Zamora up 

with rope.  

When cross-examined, Mr. Torres affirmed that he never went outside to see if he 

could help.  The prosecutor then asked, “That’s not a common occurrence for you, is it, to 

have an officer and an individual involved in some kind of fight or something on the 

ground in front of your home?”  RP at 834.  Mr. Torres answered, “Oh, if it’s a cop, I 

don’t have nothing to do and nothing to say.”  RP at 834.   

During closing, the State argued:   

There was a witness that came in for defense, Javier Torres, that said 
that officers were kicking at him, that the defendant was just on the ground, 
that he’d think he said his hands were behind his back, just being very 
compliant, that officers were just, you know, they’re all just kicking at him.  
That’s not what the evidence supports. 

And if you think about—if you remember what Javier Torres said, 

the exact quote, when talking about police, Javier stated, “If it’s a cop, I 
don’t have nothing to do and nothing to say.”  This is a guy who doesn’t 
like the police.  He—you know, when Officer Hake is out there struggling 
with the guy, he just stays inside, closes his door, doesn’t offer any help.  
Then obviously, you know, for someone to come into court and say that on 
the stand, “I don’t want nothing to do with police, I got nothing to say to 
them,” he doesn’t like law enforcement. 

RP at 902-03.  Defense counsel did not object.    

The jury deliberated for almost two full days before returning its verdict.  During 

its deliberations, it asked for definitions for “excessive force” and “necessary force.”   

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

CP at 243.  “Excessive force” was a term used in their instructions.7  “Necessary force” 

was the term the State had used in closing to describe the force it argued was justifiably 

used against Mr. Zamora.  The trial court expressed a concern that it was too late to 

provide a definition, because the parties would have no opportunity to argue its 

application.  Counsel for the parties agreed no definition should be given.  The trial court 

responded by telling the jury it had received all of the court’s instructions.   

On the afternoon of the third day of deliberations, Mr. Zamora was found guilty as 

charged.  He was sentenced based on an agreed offender score of 7.  He appeals. 

ANALYSIS 

Mr. Zamora makes seven assignments of error in his opening brief.  We granted 

permission for him to file a supplemental brief to address an issue raised by the 

Washington Supreme Court’s recent decision in State v. Blake, 197 Wn.2d 170, 481 P.3d 

7 Jury instruction 11 said: 

It is a defense to a charge of assault in the third degree that force 

used was lawful as defined in this instruction.  

A person may use force to resist an arrest or detention only if the 

person being arrested or detained is in actual and imminent danger of 
serious injury from an officer’s use of excessive force.  The person may 
employ such force and means as a reasonably prudent person would use 
under the same or similar circumstances.  

The State has the burden of proving beyond a reasonable doubt that 

the force used by the defendant was not lawful.  If you find that the State 
has not proved the absence of this defense beyond a reasonable doubt, it 
will be your duty to return a verdict of not guilty as to count one, count two, 
or both. 

CP at 217, 237 (emphasis added). 

15 

 
 
 
                                              
 
 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

521 (2021).  He contends (1) he received ineffective assistance of counsel in light of three 

prejudicial errors of his trial lawyer, (2) the trial court erred in ruling he could not cross-

examine officers with his proposed Garrity questions, (3) the State’s evidence negating 

self-defense was insufficient, (4) the prosecutor committed misconduct during voir dire 

and closing argument, and (5) his offender score was miscalculated in two respects: by 

failing to recognize that two of his prior convictions had washed out, and because he has 

two convictions for unlawful possession of a controlled substance that must be vacated in 

light of Blake.  We review the challenges in the order stated. 

I. 

INEFFECTIVE ASSISTANCE OF COUNSEL IS NOT SHOWN 

Mr. Zamora contends he received ineffective assistance of counsel in light of three 

prejudicial errors: his trial lawyer (1) failed to move to suppress evidence of his 

assaultive behavior, (2) failed to object to the exclusion of Mr. Hake’s prior conduct 

charged as fourth degree assault and disorderly conduct, and (3) failed to request a jury 

instruction defining excessive force.8  

To prevail on a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, a defendant must 

demonstrate that defense counsel’s representation was deficient, i.e., it fell below an 

objective standard of reasonableness, and counsel’s deficient representation prejudiced 

8 Mr. Zamora also makes a passing reference to his trial lawyer being ineffective 

for failing to object to the prosecutor’s statements during voir dire and closing argument.  
He does not provide argument in support of this alleged ineffective assistance, however, 
so the passing reference will not be addressed.  See RAP 10.3(a)(6).   

16 

 
 
 
                                              
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

the defendant, i.e., there is a reasonable probability that, except for counsel’s 

unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different.  State v. 

McFarland, 127 Wn.2d 322, 334-35, 899 P.2d 1251 (1995).  If a defendant fails to 

establish one prong, we need not consider the other.  State v. Hendrickson, 129 Wn.2d 

61, 78, 917 P.2d 563 (1996). 

In order for the court to find deficient performance, the defendant must establish 

“‘that counsel made errors so serious that counsel was not functioning as the “counsel” 

guaranteed the defendant by the Sixth Amendment [to the United States Constitution].’”  

State v. Grier, 171 Wn.2d 17, 32-33, 246 P.3d 1260 (2011) (quoting State v. Thomas, 109 

Wn.2d 222, 225, 743 P.2d 816 (1987)).  “The threshold for the deficient performance 

prong is high” and there is “‘a strong presumption that counsel’s performance was 

reasonable.’”  Id. at 33 (quoting State v. Kyllo, 166 Wn.2d 856, 862, 215 P.3d 177 

(2009)).  “When counsel’s conduct can be characterized as legitimate trial strategy or 

tactics, performance is not deficient.”  Kyllo, 166 Wn.2d at 863. 

Failure to move to suppress evidence of assaultive behavior 

Mr. Zamora first contends that his trial lawyer should have moved to suppress 

evidence of his assaultive conduct on grounds that when Officer Hake held out his arm 

and told Mr. Zamora he was not free to leave, it was a seizure unsupported by a 

reasonable suspicion that Mr. Zamora was, or was about to be, engaged in a crime.  The 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

State argues in response that even if the seizure was unlawful, exclusion of evidence of 

Mr. Zamora’s alleged assault was not an available remedy. 

Mr. Zamora replies that exclusion of evidence was an available remedy, relying on 

State v. Cormier, 100 Wn. App. 457, 462-63, 997 P.2d 950 (2000).  Br. of Appellant at 

32.9  But Cormier does not hold that if an individual is unlawfully searched or seized then 

evidence of his responsive assault is inadmissible.  It states the opposite.  It cites State v. 

Mierz, 127 Wn.2d 460, 901 P.2d 286 (1995), for the proposition that evidence of a 

defendant’s assaultive behavior is properly admitted regardless of any alleged Fourth 

Amendment violation.  Id. at 473.  Other case law is in accord.  “When an individual 

assaults a police officer whose intrusion allegedly violates Fourth Amendment 

protections, evidence of the assault is outside the scope of the exclusionary rule.”  State v. 

McKinlay, 87 Wn. App. 394, 398, 942 P.2d 999 (1997) (citing Mierz, 127 Wn.2d at 471-

75).  “A contrary rule would allow one who was subject to an illegal search [or seizure] 

to respond with unlimited force and be immunized from prosecution.”  Id. (citing State v. 

Aydelotte, 35 Wn. App. 125, 132, 665 P.2d 443 (1983)).   

9 Mr. Zamora also cites State v. Valentine, 132 Wn.2d 1, 21, 935 P.2d 1294 
(1997), State v. Westlund, 13 Wn. App. 460, 467, 536 P.2d 20 (1975), and State v. 
Bradley, 141 Wn.2d 731, 10 P.3d 358 (2000), for support.  None of those decisions deals 
with suppression motions or exclusion of evidence of assaultive behavior.  All are 
prosecutions for assault of a police or corrections officer in which self-defense was 
asserted as a defense, but they address other issues.  Clearly, since the jury in each of 
those cases was hearing prosecution of the assault, defense counsel either never moved to 
suppress evidence of the assault or, if it did, it lost the motion and did not challenge 
denial of the motion on appeal. 

18 

 
 
 
                                              
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

A motion to suppress evidence of Mr. Zamora’s assaultive conduct was legally 

insupportable even if the seizure was unlawful.  Deficient representation is not shown. 

Mr. Hake’s prior assault and disorderly conduct charges 

Mr. Zamora next contends his trial lawyer was ineffective because he failed to 

oppose the State’s request that the court exclude evidence of the assault and disorderly 

conduct charges against Mr. Hake that were the subject of a stipulated continuance for 

dismissal.  He argues the State presented evidence of Mr. Hake’s work experience and 

training that it later relied on in arguing that the officer was able to exercise “amazing 

restraint” when his contact with Mr. Zamora resulted in a violent struggle.  RP at 890.  

Likening this evidence and argument to that involved in State v. York, 28 Wn. App. 33, 

621 P.2d 784 (1980), Mr. Zamora argues that his lawyer could and should have 

impeached Mr. Hake with his prior violent conduct.  

York involved ER 608(b), and the ability to cross-examine a witness about specific 

instances of conduct that are probative of truthfulness or untruthfulness.  In York, the 

State’s prosecution of two counts of delivery of a controlled substance relied on the 

testimony of an undercover investigator—its only witness to the sales—who had been 

paid $20 per successful drug buy.  Id. at 34-35.  On direct examination, the private 

investigator testified to his long work history including his background as a military 

policeman investigating drug usage and his previous work for the police department as an 

undercover agent.  Id. at 34.  The defense sought to cross-examine him about being fired 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

from a trainee position with a Montana sheriff’s department.  Id. at 35.  It sought to 

establish that he was unemployed and not above fabricating or otherwise adjusting his 

testimony about drug buys in order to obtain money.  Id.  The State moved to exclude 

evidence of the investigator’s adverse work history and the court granted the motion, 

finding it was a collateral matter.  Id. at 34.  In closing argument, the prosecutor told 

jurors there was “no reason at all to doubt” the investigator’s testimony.  Id. at 35. 

York had called a number of alibi witnesses who testified that he was not present 

at the location where the alleged drug buy occurred, so this court observed that the 

undercover investigator’s credibility “was not, therefore, collateral; it was the very 

essence of the defense.”  Id. at 36.  That being the case, “as a matter of fundamental 

fairness, the defense should have been allowed to bring out the only negative 

characteristics of the one most important witness against York. . . .  [W]e find this area of 

impeachment to be of considerable importance to the defense and cannot in good 

conscience condone the trial court’s action.”  Id. at 37. 

Mr. Zamora fails to articulate how the fact that Mr. Hake engaged in conduct 

charged as fourth degree assault and disorderly conduct would be “probative of . . . 

untruthfulness” and thereby a permissible area of questioning under ER 608(b).  See 

United States v. Page, 808 F.2d 723, 730 (10th Cir. 1987) (acts admissible under Federal 

Rule of Evidence 608(b) generally include “forgery, uttering forged instruments, bribery, 

suppression of evidence, false pretenses, cheating, [and] embezzlement”) (alteration in 

20 

 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

original).10  Charges of fourth degree assault and disorderly conduct imply aggressive 

conduct, not untruthful conduct.  Evidence of Mr. Hake’s stipulation to fourth degree 

assault and disorderly conduct was more likely to suggest a propensity for aggression in 

order to show action in conformity therewith—a purpose for which the evidence would 

be inadmissible under ER 404(b).   

This court observed in York that it would not have reversed the conviction if the 

undercover investigator’s prior employment troubles “had no substantial bearing upon the 

witness’ credibility.”  28 Wn. App. at 37.  Mr. Zamora does not demonstrate that his trial 

lawyer could plausibly have argued that Mr. Hake’s acts of criminal aggression were a 

permissible subject matter of questioning under ER 608(b) and York.  Deficient 

representation is not shown. 

Jury instruction defining “excessive force” 

Mr. Zamora next contends that his trial lawyer’s failure to request a jury 

instruction defining “excessive force” was prejudicial and deficient representation.  He 

does not argue that his lawyer should have advocated for giving such an instruction 

during jury deliberations.  He contends, instead, that his trial lawyer should have made an 

earlier, timely request for such an instruction.   

10 “Where our evidence rules mirror their federal counterparts, we may look to 

federal case law interpreting the federal rules as persuasive authority in interpreting our 
own rules.”  In re Det. of Pouncy, 168 Wn.2d 382, 392 n.9, 229 P.3d 678 (2010). 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
                                              
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

For cases involving third degree assault of a police officer, there is no pattern 

criminal instruction on excessive force that accompanies WPIC11 17.02.01, the self-

defense instruction that refers to excessive force.  Mr. Zamora suggests that his trial 

lawyer could have proposed the pattern instruction used in civil cases involving an 

unreasonable force claim under the Fourth Amendment.12   

11 11 WASHINGTON PRACTICE: WASHINGTON PATTERN JURY INSTRUCTIONS: 

CRIMINAL (4th ed. 2016) (WPIC). 

12 The instruction, which appears at 6A WASHINGTON PRACTICE: WASHINGTON 

PATTERN JURY INSTRUCTIONS: CIVIL § 342.03 (7th ed. 2019) (WPI), states: 

A seizure of a person is unreasonable under the Fourth Amendment 
if [a police officer] [(name of other person acting under color of state law)] 
uses excessive force [in making a lawful arrest] [and] [or] in defending 
[himself] [herself] [others]].  Thus, in order to prove an unreasonable 
seizure in this case, the plaintiff must prove by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the officer[s] used excessive force when (insert factual basis 
of the claim). 

Under the Fourth Amendment, a police officer may only use such 
force as is objectively reasonable under all of the circumstances.  In other 
words, you must judge the reasonableness of a particular use of force from 
the perspective of a reasonable officer on the scene and not with the 20/20 
vision of hindsight. 

In determining whether (name of officer(s)) used excessive force in 

this case consider all of the circumstances known to the officer[s] on the 
scene [including but not limited to: 

a) severity of the crime; 

b) circumstances to which the officer was responding; 

c) whether (name of plaintiff) reasonably appeared to pose an 

immediate threat to [name of defendant] or others; 

d) whether (name of plaintiff) actively resisted [arrest] [detention]; 

22 

 
 
 
                                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

What is missing from this argument on appeal is why it was defective 

representation not to request the civil instruction.  Mr. Zamora implies that a definition 

was necessary for him to argue his theory of the case, but that is not so.  “‘Trial courts 

must define technical words and expressions used in jury instructions, but need not define 

words and expressions that are of ordinary understanding or self-explanatory.’”  In re 

Det. of Pouncy, 168 Wn.2d 382, 390, 229 P.3d 678 (2010) (quoting State v. Brown, 132 

Wn.2d 529, 611-12, 940 P.2d 546 (1997)).  Mr. Zamora does not identify any argument 

that his trial lawyer was unable to make because the jury did not have a definition of 

excessive force. 

A tactical reason for not requesting an instruction on excessive force is that it 

would deflect the jury’s attention from what trial counsel treated as the more defense-

friendly focus of the court’s instructions: whether the State proved beyond a reasonable 

doubt that the force used by Mr. Zamora was not lawful.  Defense counsel was able to 

e) whether (name of plaintiff) attempted to evade [arrest] 

[detention]; 

f) the amount of time available to (name of defendant) at the time 
[he][she] made the decision to use force, and what type and 
degree of force was necessary; 

g) whether there was a change of circumstances during which (name 
  of defendant) had to make a decision about the type and amount 
  of force that appeared to be necessary; 

h) whether alternative methods of using force for [arrest] [detention] 
  were available to (name of defendant) at that time; and 

i) whether the officer issued a warning to the suspect if feasible]. 

23 

 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

argue that the physical struggle was started by Officer Hake.  He was able to argue that 

Mr. Zamora had no pepper spray, no stun gun, and no handgun to use against six officers.  

He was able to argue that none of the officers’ hearts stopped and that none of them was 

hospitalized, in intensive care, four weeks after the encounter.   

Mr. Zamora’s argument on appeal boils down to the fact that the jury turned out to 

want a definition of excessive force.  But “‘[a] fair assessment of attorney performance 

requires that every effort be made to eliminate the distorting effects of hindsight, to 

reconstruct the circumstances of counsel’s challenged conduct, and to evaluate the 

conduct from counsel’s perspective at the time.’”  Grier, 171 Wn.2d at 34 (alteration in 

original) (quoting Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 689, 104 S. Ct. 2052, 80 L. 

Ed. 2d 674 (1984)).  Here again, deficient representation is not shown. 

II. 

THE TRIAL COURT DID NOT ABUSE ITS DISCRETION IN EXCLUDING EVIDENCE THAT 
THE OFFICERS INVOLVED PROVIDED GARRITY STATEMENTS  

Mr. Zamora contends the trial court abused its discretion and deprived him of his 

right to present a defense when it excluded evidence that the responding officers who 

testified had provided Garrity statements.   

Both the federal and state constitutions protect the rights of criminal defendants to 

present a complete defense and to confront adverse witnesses.  State v. Orn, 197 Wn.2d 

343, 482 P.3d 913, 917 (2021); U.S. CONST. amend. VI; WASH. CONST. art. I, § 22.  

“‘The primary and most important component’ of the confrontation right ‘is the right to 

24 

 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

conduct a meaningful cross-examination of adverse witnesses.’”  Orn, 197 Wn.2d at 347 

(quoting State v. Darden, 145 Wn.2d 612, 620, 41 P.3d 1189 (2002)).  

Meaningful cross-examination does not mean unlimited cross-examination.  

Delaware v. Van Arsdall, 475 U.S. 673, 679, 106 S. Ct. 1431, 89 L. Ed. 2d 674 (1986); 

State v. Romero-Ochoa, 193 Wn.2d 341, 348, 440 P.3d 994 (2019), cert. denied, 141 S. 

Ct. 398 (2020).  A trial court has wide latitude to place reasonable limits on cross-

examination based on concerns about prejudice, confusion of the issues, undue delay or 

waste of time, and marginal relevance.  Van Arsdall, 475 U.S. at 679; see also State v. 

Lee, 188 Wn.2d 473, 487, 396 P.3d 316 (2017).   

We review de novo whether the trial court’s evidentiary rulings abridged a 

defendant’s Sixth Amendment rights.  Orn, 197 Wn.2d at 350.  We review the exclusion 

of evidence under the evidentiary rules for abuse of discretion.  Id. at 351. 

We apply a three-part test to determine whether a trial court violated a defendant’s 

right to confront a witness by limiting the scope of cross-examination: 

First, the evidence must be of at least minimal relevance.  Second, if 
relevant, the burden is on the State to show the evidence is so prejudicial as 
to disrupt the fairness of the fact-finding process at trial.  Finally, the 
State’s interest to exclude prejudicial evidence must be balanced against the 
defendant’s need for the information sought, and only if the State’s interest 
outweighs the defendant’s need can otherwise relevant information be 
withheld. 

Lee, 188 Wn.2d at 488 (quoting Darden, 145 Wn.2d at 622).   

25 

 
 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

In arguing that the trial court violated his rights by limiting cross-examination, Mr. 

Zamora devotes most of his analysis to the second and third steps of the test rather than 

the crucial threshold issue of minimal relevance.  Evidence is relevant if it has “any 

tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination  

of the action more probable or less probable than it would be without the evidence.”   

ER 401.   

Evidence that impeaches or discredits a witness is relevant.  Lee, 188 Wn.2d at 

488.  Mr. Zamora asserts that the fact that the officers provided Garrity statements 

detracts from their credibility, but he never explains why that would be the case.  His 

argument is all conclusory.  See Br. of Appellant at 43-44 (“factors surrounding making a 

Garrity statement went directly to [the officers’] mental state, credibility, and colored the 

entire investigation”; “[b]ecause each officer participated in the Garrity statements to 

preserve their employment, and their credibility was at issue . . . [the evidence] should 

have been allowed”; “Whether officers had been warned they had to make a statement or 

lose their job, and the statements could not be used to prosecute them bore directly on 

their credibility”). 

In arguing for his right to cross-examine, Mr. Zamora’s trial lawyer explained his 

understanding of the context and consequences of providing a Garrity statement: 

[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  A Garrity statement, your Honor, is a 

statement that’s made with a warning that is similar to a Miranda warning, 
with the exception that it has an added clause that nothing in the statement 

26 

 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

can be used to prosecute the person making that statement unless they lie in 
the statement. 

. . . . 
. . . [T]he Garrity warning includes that the statements being made 

under immunity from prosecution, basically use immunity, that they are 
required to make the statement for purposes of the investigation into their 
conduct, but that unless they commit perjury or they lie in the statement, 
that it can’t be used for any other conviction purposes, your Honor. 

THE COURT: For any criminal purposes? 

[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Yes.  Except for I believe it’s specific to 

perjury.  I think it does still allow for convictions for perjury. 

RP at 402-04. 

If Mr. Zamora established in cross-examination that the officers provided 

statements about the incident knowing they would not face prosecution for any 

wrongdoing reported, but only if they perjured themselves, it would not discredit or 

impeach their testimony.  It would arguably enhance it.  Because Mr. Zamora was unable 

to demonstrate that his proposed examination was minimally relevant, the trial court did 

not err or abuse its discretion in imposing the limitation. 

III. 

EVIDENCE SUFFICIENCY 

Mr. Zamora next contends that the State’s evidence was insufficient to disprove 

self-defense.  Evidence is sufficient if, when viewed in the light most favorable to the 

State, it permits a rational trier of fact to find the essential elements of the crime beyond a 

reasonable doubt.  State v. Green, 94 Wn.2d 216, 221, 616 P.2d 628 (1980), overruled on 

other grounds by Washington v. Recuenco, 548 U.S. 212, 126 S. Ct. 2546, 165 L. Ed. 2d 

27 

 
 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

466 (2006).  Courts must draw all reasonable inferences from the evidence in favor of the 

State and interpret the evidence most strongly against the defendant.  State v. Salinas, 119 

Wn.2d 192, 201, 829 P.2d 1068 (1992).  Appellate courts defer to the fact finder on the 

resolution of conflicting testimony, credibility determinations, and the persuasiveness of 

the evidence.  State v. Thomas, 150 Wn.2d 821, 874-75, 83 P.3d 970 (2004). 

Mr. Zamora asserts that once Officer Hake grabbed him by the elbows and said, 

“Put your hands behind your back, I’ll fucking kill you,” any citizen in that situation 

would fear being seriously harmed.  To begin with, the evidence was not that those 

events happened simultaneously.  

More importantly, the arrestee’s fear must be of actual, imminent danger if he 

does not resist, not actual, imminent danger if he does resist.  Jurors could reasonably 

find that Mr. Zamora did not face actual, imminent danger if he put his hands behind his 

back, allowed himself to be handcuffed, and awaited the arrival of the deputies Officer 

Hake told Mr. Zamora wanted to question him.  “[T]he established rule for use of force in 

self-defense cases involving arrests requires the person face a situation of actual, 

imminent danger.”  State v. Bradley, 141 Wn.2d 731, 738, 10 P.3d 358 (2000).  “Orderly 

and safe law enforcement demands that an arrestee not resist a lawful arrest . . . unless the 

arrestee is actually about to be seriously injured or killed.”  State v. Holeman, 103 Wn.2d 

426, 430, 693 P.2d 89 (1985) (quoting State v. Westlund, 13 Wn. App. 460, 467, 536 P.2d 

20 (1975)). 

28 

 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, reasonable jurors 

could find that Officer Hake’s initial use of force was based on a reasonable fear that Mr. 

Zamora was reaching for a weapon, was not excessive, and did not actually put Mr. 

Zamora’s life in imminent danger.   

The evidence is also sufficient to support the conviction for assaulting Officer 

Welsh.  A jury could reasonably find that Officer Welsh was merely attempting to 

restrain Mr. Zamora in order to effectuate what had become a valid arrest when Mr. 

Zamora kicked him in the chest.  

IV. 

PROSECUTORIAL MISCONDUCT 

Mr. Zamora contends for the first time on appeal that the prosecutor committed 

misconduct in voir dire and in closing statement.  The misconduct alleged to have 

occurred in voir dire was the prosecutor’s irrelevant and allegedly inflammatory 

discussion of issues of illegal immigration, border security, and juror fear of 

undocumented immigrants.  The misconduct alleged in closing argument is that the 

prosecutor discounted the testimony of Javier Torres as someone who does not like law 

enforcement, an argument Mr. Zamora contends was calculated to invite the jury to “slip 

comfortably into an unconscious bias.”  Br. of Appellant at 55.  

Prosecutorial misconduct is not attorney misconduct in the sense of violating rules 

of professional conduct.  State v. Fisher, 165 Wn.2d 727, 740 n.1, 202 P.3d 937 (2009).  

It is, instead, a term of art that refers to “prosecutorial mistakes or actions [that] are not 

29 

 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

harmless and deny a defendant [a] fair trial.”  Id.  To succeed on a prosecutorial 

misconduct claim, an appellant has the burden of establishing that the prosecutor’s 

conduct was improper (as being at least mistaken) and was prejudicial.  State v. Stenson, 

132 Wn.2d 668, 718-19, 940 P.2d 1239 (1997).  A defendant demonstrates prejudice by 

proving there is a “‘substantial likelihood the . . . misconduct affected the jury’s 

verdict.’”  In re Pers. Restraint of Pirtle, 136 Wn.2d 467, 481-82, 965 P.2d 593 (1998) 

(quoting State v. Pirtle, 127 Wn.2d 628, 672, 904 P.2d 245 (1995)). 

Where, as here, there was no timely objection, reversal is required only if the 

conduct is “‘so flagrant and ill-intentioned that it causes an enduring and resulting 

prejudice that could not have been neutralized by a curative instruction to the jury.’”  

State v. Warren, 165 Wn.2d 17, 43, 195 P.3d 940 (2008) (quoting Brown, 132 Wn.2d at 

561).  “This standard sets a much higher bar for reversal than the ‘improper and 

prejudicial’ standard we employ when a defendant timely objects.”  State v. Loughbom, 

196 Wn.2d 64, 74, 470 P.3d 499 (2020).  As such, our Supreme Court has only 

sanctioned reversing convictions based on flagrant and ill intentioned misconduct “‘in a 

narrow set of cases where we were concerned about the jury drawing improper inferences 

from the evidence.’”  Id. (quoting In re Pers. Restraint of Phelps, 190 Wn.2d 155, 170, 

410 P.3d 1142 (2018)). 

Mr. Zamora characterizes the prosecutor’s conduct as attempting to appeal to 

racial stereotypes and jurors’ potential racial bias, a Sixth Amendment violation that our 

30 

 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

Supreme Court had held requires the State to demonstrate beyond a reasonable doubt 

“‘did not affect the verdict.’”  In re Pers. Restraint of Sandoval, 189 Wn.2d 811, 833-34, 

408 P.3d 675 (2018) (quoting State v. Monday, 171 Wn.2d 667, 680, 257 P.3d 551 

(2011)); U.S. CONST. amend. VI.  But “this heightened standard does not apply every 

time a prosecutor mentions race.”  Id. at 834.  Instead, the heightened standard applies 

“only when a prosecutor mentions race in an effort to appeal to a juror’s potential racial 

bias, i.e., to support assertions based on stereotypes rather than evidence.”  Id. 

Closing argument 

We first address the prosecutor’s statements about Javier Torres in closing 

argument.  Mr. Zamora argues that when the prosecutor argued that jurors should 

discount Mr. Torres’s testimony because he apparently does not like police, he committed 

the “sin of Monday.”  Br. of Appellant at 55.  In Monday, the prosecutor argued a theme 

that “black folk don’t testify against black folk.”  171 Wn.2d at 674.   

The prosecutor in this case did not mention Mr. Torres’s race nor did he rely on 

racial stereotyping to argue that Mr. Torres would be biased against police.  He relied on 

Mr. Torres’s testimony.  Recall that when Mr. Torres was asked if it was not true that 

officers and individuals did not commonly get involved in fights in front of his home, he 

answered, “Oh, if it’s a cop, I don’t have nothing to do and nothing to say.”  RP at 834.  

Mr. Torres was the only eyewitness to Mr. Zamora’s struggle with officers whose 

testimony was favorable to Mr. Zamora.  Whatever Mr. Torres’s race, the prosecutor 

31 

 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

would naturally point to any evidence suggesting Mr. Torres had a bias against police.  

The argument was not about Latinos, it was specific to Mr. Torres.  When a prosecutor 

makes a logical argument that jurors should discount unhelpful testimony from a witness, 

the fact that the witness is a person of color does not, standing alone, make the argument 

racist. 

Voir dire  

Mr. Zamora’s unpreserved complaint about voir dire implicates several legal 

concerns.  It triggered the trial court’s concern because of ER 413, adopted in 2018, 

which imposes strict limits on the admissibility of evidence of the immigration status of 

parties and witnesses in light of “the prejudicial nature of evidence of immigration 

status.”  ER 413(a)(4).  While the rule does not apply to the conduct of voir dire, it 

reflects a recognition that jurors can have strongly held biases about persons who are in 

the country illegally that should not play any part in a defendant’s criminal trial. 

It raises the concern that a defendant’s criminal responsibility must be decided on 

the basis of the evidence against him, not on the basis of fear about a class of persons to 

which he belongs (or in this case, might be perceived to belong).  Cf. State v. Belgarde, 

110 Wn.2d 504, 508, 755 P.2d 174 (1988) (prosecutor should not have argued in closing 

the danger presented by the American Indian Movement “which the jurors ha[d] no right 

to consider”), aff’d, 118 Wn.2d 1021, 826 P.2d 147 (1992).  In a case in which our 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

Supreme Court recently reversed a conviction that had been encouraged throughout trial 

as a step in the “war on drugs,” the high court explained: 

Justice can be secured only when a conviction is based on specific evidence 
in an individual case and not on rhetoric.  We do not convict to make an 
example of the accused, we do not convict by appeal to a popular cause, 
and we do not convict by tying a prosecution to a global campaign against 
illegal drugs. 

Loughbom, 196 Wn.2d at 69-70. 

The prosecutor’s references to border security and immigration were limited to 

voir dire, the purpose of which is to “discover[ ] any basis for challenge for cause and for 

the purpose of gaining knowledge to enable an intelligent exercise of peremptory 

challenges.”  CrR 6.4(b).  The prosecutor’s exploration of the prospective jurors’ 

attitudes about locked doors and neighborhood safety was understandable.  This was a 

case in which a citizen’s mistaken report of vehicle prowling almost resulted in the death 

of an individual who, until seized by a police officer, was guilty of nothing more than 

walking while high on drugs.  Both sides would be interested in knowing whether venire 

members were vigilant, hypervigilant, or relatively unconcerned about crime in their 

neighborhoods. 

Adding border security and illegal immigration as a layer to the questioning was 

irrelevant and unnecessarily politicized it.  But defense counsel could have asked for a 

sidebar and objected, and the trial court would have been well within its authority to 

instruct the prosecutor that the topics were off-limits.  Our system vests a trial judge with 

33 

 
 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

considerable latitude in shaping the limits and extent of voir dire.  Lopez-Stayer v. Pitts, 

122 Wn. App. 45, 50, 93 P.3d 904 (2004).  Such a limitation would have been consistent 

with the reasoning behind ER 413. 

Mr. Zamora’s lawyer was in a superior position to assess whether the voir dire was 

harming the defense.  It is evident from the report of proceedings that a number of jurors 

had no anti-immigrant bias and spoke up; defense counsel had the opportunity to observe 

other jurors and assess their reaction.  The questions, responses, facial expressions and 

body language could inform his challenges and juror selection.  Having steered clear of 

any controversy himself, he then used his opening statement to nullify any improper 

relevance that jurors might have attached.  His firsthand conclusion, vetted with others at 

his office, was that “I’m not sure that [the voir dire] benefitted the state.  That might have 

been to their detriment.”  RP at 221. 

Mr. Zamora is unable to demonstrate that the prosecutor’s conduct caused an 

enduring and resulting prejudice that could not have been neutralized.    

V. 

OFFENDER SCORE 

In his opening brief, Mr. Zamora challenged his offender score on the basis of 

convictions he contended should have washed out.  The State contended that Mr. 

Zamora’s allegation of error was not supported by the record.  But it also reported that in 

a CrR 7.8 motion that had been withdrawn, Mr. Zamora had identified a different legal 

error in his offender score.  It did not object to resentencing.   

34 

 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

Following the recent decision in Blake, Mr. Zamora filed a motion with this court 

for additional relief, arguing that he had two prior convictions for unlawful possession of 

a controlled substance that must be vacated, resulting in a two-point reduction in his 

offender score.  While the State does not agree that this panel can provide all of the relief 

requested by Mr. Zamora’s motion, it continues to support resentencing.  

We agree that resentencing is required.  

STATEMENT OF ADDITIONAL GROUNDS 

In a pro se statement of additional grounds (SAG) Mr. Zamora raises seven: (1) 

Washington State Patrol Sergeant Matt Andersen sat next to the prosecutor for the entire 

trial and twice reached for his gun; (2) public defender Tyson Lang is friends with Kevin 

Hake, giving rise to a conflict of interest; (3) Sergeant Andersen led Mr. Zamora to 

believe he was investigating the officers involved, which led to Mr. Zamora giving 

Sergeant Andersen his medical report; (4) Mr. Zamora has only one juvenile felony that 

the State counted as two, over Mr. Zamora’s objection; (5) if Officer Hake had asked or 

said he was going to search Mr. Zamora for self-protection, Mr. Zamora would have let 

him do it; (6) the mistake made in calculation of Mr. Zamora’s offender score in this case 

is the same mistake made in Grant County Superior Court case no. 14-1-00428-4; and (7) 

the State was allowed to lie to the jury about Mr. Hake. 

The offender score issues identified as Mr. Zamora’s fourth and sixth grounds can 

be argued at resentencing.  As for his first ground, Sergeant Andersen was the State’s ER 

35 

 
 
 
No. 37019-4-III 
State v. Zamora 

615 representative at trial and was entitled to sit at counsel table.  Mr. Zamora’s 

opportunity to present the evidence advanced in his fifth ground was at trial; he identifies 

no basis on which his failure to present that evidence provides a basis for appeal.  His 

remaining grounds are not supported by evidence in the record.  If he has evidence to 

support them and a legal basis on which he believes they entitle him to relief, his remedy 

is to seek relief by personal restraint petition.  State v. Norman, 61 Wn. App. 16, 27-28, 

808 P.2d 1159 (1991). 

We affirm the convictions and remand for resentencing. 

A majority of the panel has determined this opinion will not be printed in the 

Washington Appellate Reports, but it will be filed for public record pursuant to RCW 

2.06.040. 

WE CONCUR: 

_____________________________ 
Lawrence-Berrey, J.  

_____________________________ 
Siddoway, J. 

~ • 

_____________________________ 
Pennell, C.J. 

JI_  C. "j"" 
• 
l 

• 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE 

I, Marie Trombley, do hereby certify under penalty of perjury under the 
laws of the State of Washington, that July 8, 2021, I mailed to the 
following US Postal Service first class mail, the postage prepaid, or 
electronically served, by prior agreement between the parties, a true and 
correct copy of the Petition for Review to the following: Grant County 
Prosecuting Attorney at gdano@grantcountywa.gov and to Joseph Zamora 
c/o Marie Trombley.  

Marie Trombley 
WSBA 41410 
PO Box 829 
Graham, WA  98338 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MARIE TROMBLEY

July 08, 2021 - 12:13 PM

Transmittal Information

Filed with Court:
Appellate Court Case Number:    37019-4
Appellate Court Case Title:
Superior Court Case Number:

Court of Appeals Division III

State of Washington v. Joseph Mario Zamora
18-1-00263-2

The following documents have been uploaded:

• 

370194_Petition_for_Review_20210708121122D3968960_4367.pdf 
    This File Contains: 
     Petition for Review 
     The Original File Name was ZAMORA PETITION FOR REVIEW.pdf

A copy of the uploaded files will be sent to:

• 
• 

gdano@grantcountywa.gov
kjmccrae@grantcountywa.gov

Comments:

Sender Name: Marie Trombley - Email: marietrombley@comcast.net 
Address: 
PO BOX 829 
GRAHAM, WA, 98338-0829 
Phone: 253-445-7920

Note: The Filing Id is 20210708121122D3968960

